..  Content: Lightly-edited source material from PDF.

Precalculated Spells
=====================

Finding a Spell
---------------
With well over 200 different spells, we’ve split them into
nine schools established in the D6 Bloodshadows worldbook.
You can uses these schools as they appear here in your own
campaigns, add more, combine existing schools, or ignore
them completely.

If you decide to uses schools, you might want to have them
as foci of the Magic skills. Foci narrow the existing general
skills, thus limiting the number of spells a character can
cast. To cast a spell in a particular school, the mage needs
the correct focus. The cost of obtaining a focused skill is the
same for those settings that do not use foci; however, in
settings using the magic school option, a caster may never
have the general skill. (For more details on schools as Magic
skill foci, see Chapter 6, “Magic,” in the D6 Bloodshadows
worldbook.)

..  sidebar::

    Schools of Magic

    :Alchemy:
        spells that imbue objects (rings, weapons, potions, etc.) with other spells; alchemists need to know not only alchemy, but also the school or schools of the spells they wish to place into objects -- this school gets its own chapter

    :Chronomancy:
        spells that deal with time

    :Elemental:
        spells that deal with the four elements: earth, air, fire, and water

    :Necromancy:
        spells that deal with the dead

    :Peregrination:
        spells that deal with movement and dimensions

    :Photomancy:
        spells that deal with light and darkness

    :Somniomancy:
        spells that deal with sleep anddreams

    :Technomancy:
        spells that deal with metal, weapons, machinery, and the like

    :Vitomancy:
        spells that deal with life, including healing, improving the body, and creating new forms of life

    :Wizardry:
        spells that deal with spells not covered by other schools, as well as those creatures of a sorcerous nature (such as most demons)

Within each school, the spells are alphabetized.
An alphabetical index of all spells publisehd to date, among other indices, appears at the end of this book.

Targeting a Spell
------------------

Many spells include reminders about which skill to use
when targeting a spell, but for those that don’t, here are
some guidelines.

Most spells that target another unwilling character require
the caster to make an attack roll. Generally, this means a
marksmanship/fireaarms, throwing, or apportation roll (or the
governing attribute, at no penalty,  if the character doesn’t
have the needed skill). When the range specifies “touch,” the
character must make a brawling/fighting attempt — no Magic
skill will work in this instance.

Spells with ranges of 10 meters or more have a Short range
limit equal to 25% of the listed range, a Medium range of 50%,
and a Long range equal to the list range. (Round all fractions
up.) Ranges of 3.5 and 5 meters only use Short range (which
equals the listed value). Anything less than 3.5 meters falls
within Point Blank range.

In a few cases, an interaction roll, usually with willpower/
mettle, or resistance roll with stamina is more appropriate.
Note that target may use the governing attribute if she
doesn’t have the skill.

Rolling the targeting skill does not count as a separate
action for determining the multi-action penality.

The targeting roll for a spell is a good way of providing an
opponent with a defense against an attack. Except for actively
dodging combat attacks, the victim doesn’t need to spend an
action to ward off a magical spell. However, the gamemaster
may lower the target’s roll if he decides that there’s an ele -
ment of surprise to the spell’s casting.

If you wish spells to automatically work, then ignore the
targeting information.

Using a Spell
-------------

Mages may rely on the effects of spells with casting times
of one round or longer on their turn in the round after the
end of the casting time. Thus, an offensive spell with a casting
time of one round may be targeted in the round after it was
cast. If the mage waits more than a round after triggering
the spell, the effect of the spell is lost.

Spells that give characters skills or bonuses to use as they
please do count as multi-actions when the character employs
the skill in the same round as casting the spell.

Spells that provide a skill intended for determining the
effect, but over which the user otherwise has no control,
must be used in the same round in which the spell goes off.
This does not count as a multi-action.

Interpreting The Effect
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

In the *D6 Adventure Rulebook*, and in the spell descriptions
herein, there are guidelines for determining the effects of
spells. But a little clarification won’t hurt.

When an effect’s value is used as a damage value, never
modify it by result points. In most cases, it doesn’t matter
how well a spell hits a person — just that it does. Instead,
the result point bonus of the spell skill roll should add to its
range or targeting skill total, unless the result points are used
to determine the effectiveness of the spell (such as various
levels of success).

Certain effect will have some unusual rules. That’s fine for
spells listed in this book, but how does someone interpret
spells she creates?

Due to the wide range of spells that can be created, the
player and the gamemaster will have to use their best judg-
ment. In most cases, they can compare what the spell does
to some other, similar game mechanic. For example, a spell
that is designed to control a character’s mind might be said to
intimidate or charm him into submission -- so they can use
the rules for intimidation or charm, substituting the effect’s
value of the spell for the skill die code the character would
normally use.

Modifiers & Spell Effectiveness
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Difficulty modifiers can increase (or decrease) the effec -
tiveness of a spell. For example, a character who chooses to
throw a spell at a particular part of a target’s anatomy (if the
spell is capable of being that precise) or perform a called shot
can apply these modifiers to the targeting roll.

Likewise, if a character who is being attacked by a damage
spell hides behind applicable cover, the effectiveness of the
spell might be decreased.

Gamemasters and players can check through the “Example
Skill Difficulties” and the “Combat Options” chapters of the
rulebooks to select other applicable modifiers, which might
affect the targeting or usage skill roll or the roll of any skill
provided by the spell.

Chronomancy
-------------

(((sidebar)))
Chronomancy Caution
Mucking with time is a powerful ability. Most game-
masters should restrict its availability in their games,
especially to starting characters. Characters should be
required to obtain experience in chronomancy magic,
whether this is represented only by roleplaying adven-
tures with a master or it requires the acquisition of the
time Arcane Knowledge Special Ability.
(((sidebar)))
Chronal Fog
Skill: Conjuration
Arcane Knowledge: magic, time
Difficulty: 11
Effect: 15 (Armor Value of 5D, physical only)
Range: Self (+0)
Speed: Instantaneous (+0)
Duration: 1 minute (+9)
Casting Time: 1 round (-4)
Other Aspects:
Area Effect (+10): Sphere with radius of 2 meters
Components (-8): Three grams of mica flakes (uncommon, destroyed)
Focused (+4): On caster
Gestures (-2): Twirls arms around while dispersing the mica flakes to form a ring around the caster (fairly simple)
Incantations (-3): “Mists of time, clouds of fate, shield me now, for the hour is late!” (sentence, loud)
Upon the dispersal of the spell component, a foglike haze
surrounds the magic wielder. The haze is formed by the chronal
echoes that emanate from the fluctuating temporal fields that
the mage summons to deflect physical damage. The barrier
is centered upon the caster and provides an Armor Value of
5D against all types of physical (not mental) attacks. The
fog effect of the spell offers the same visibility limitations
of light fog for both the magic wielder and those who wish
to peer through it.
Chronobolt
Skill: Conjuration
Arcane Knowledge: death, time
Difficulty: 16
Effect: 30 (5D physical damage, ignores all armor)
Range: 10 meters (+5)
Speed: Instantaneous (+5)
Duration: 1 second (+0)
Casting Time: 1 second (-0)
Other Aspects:
Components (-4): A small hourglass (uncommon)
Gestures (-2): Hold an hourglass before the intended target and shake the sand inside it (fairly simple)
Incantations (-2): “The future beckons, come and embrace the pain. You now shall suffer, tis victory I gain!” (sen- tence)
The successful casting of a chronobolt allows the temporal
manipulator to create an aura that causes a portion of the
intended target to move slightly forward in time. (This also
means that no armor protects against the bolt.) The chronal
disturbance does 5D in damage to the victim from a range
of up to 10 meters from the caster. She must make a marks-
manship/firearms or apportation roll to hit the target. The bolt
must be fired in the same round that the spell is cast. After
spell effects have been resolved, the target suffers no further
ill effects from the temporal disturbance.
The caster cannot choose which portion of the victim is
moved further in time. Such things are totally random, and
in some cases, may be portions of the target’s molecular
structure instead of a limb or section of the body.
(((illo s1-1)))
Detect Resonance
Skill: Divination
Arcane Knowledge: time
Difficulty: 11
Effect: 9 (Extra Sense: Chronal Energy (R3), +3D to search and investigation for chronal energy)
Range: 10 meters (+5)
Speed: Instantaneous (+5)
Duration: 1 minute (+9)
Casting Time: 1 minute (-9)
Other Aspects:
Area of Effect (+21): Divination sphere with radius of 25 meters
Components (-12): An astrolabe with quartz lenses (uncommon); 18 grams of diamond dust (uncommon, destroyed)
Gestures (-4): Toss the diamond dust in the air and views the area with the astrolabe (complex;  investigation dif- ficulty of 11)
Incantations (-2): “Though the temporal winds run wild and free, through its shadowy wake, I now clearly see!” (sentence)
When successfully cast, the arcane aid can provide a mage
with one of the following pieces of information, which the
mage chooses at casting.
1. He could discover the existence of things that are out
of sync with the time stream in a given area, such as time
travelers or extradimensional creatures that exist out the
normal range of vision.
2. He could reveal the existence of active chronal enchant-
ments that are bedeviling a tortured soul.
3. He could decide to employ this magic to discover hid -
den chronal gates and gain entrance to other times. Such
ventures have their own risk however, as those who travel
through such devices to other times without taking proper
precautions could unwittingly release time-lost horrors.
The difficulty to find the chronal energy is 11, with higher
results indication more information. The range and area of
effect of the spell indicate the maximum effectiveness of the
newly acquired sense.
Devolution
Skill: Alteration
Arcane Knowledge: animal, folk, time
Difficulty: 23
Effect: 12 (Reduced Attribute: Knowledge/Intellect (R4), -1D to the attribute)
Range: 10 meters (+5)
Speed: Instantaneous (+5)
Duration: 5 rounds (+7)
Casting Time: 1 round (-4)
Other Aspects:
Components (-6): 60 grams of brain matter, which may come any recently deceased creature as long as the matter retains at least its cranial fluid (common, destroyed)
Focused (+3): On target
Gestures (-2): Crush brain matter and fling at the target (fairly simple)
Incantations (-2): “Time rolls back to reveal the shame of your lowly ancestors!” (sentence)
Variable Efffect (+27): Up to an additional nine ranks of Reduced Attribute: Knowledge/Intellect (which means up to an additional -3D to the attribute)
Devolution digs deep into the ancestral memories of the
intended victim in order to flood her mind with horrific
images of what her primordial ancestors once were. The oft
barbaric visions can deliver a devastating blow to the victim’s
psyche and rattle her resolve.
When casting this spell, the mage crushes the brain matter
in his hand and flings the remains at the target. If the target
cannot beat the caster’s spell skill total with a willpower/
mettle roll, the victim loses up to 4D of Knowledge/Intellect
(minimum adjust attribute value of 1D) for five rounds while
her mind reels as it psychically regresses.
Diminish
Skill: Alteration
Arcane Knowledge: magic, time
Difficulty: 10
Effect: 14 (reduces the duration of a chosen spell by 10 minutes)
Range: 15 meters (+6)
Speed: Instantaneous (+6)
Duration: 1 second (+0)
Casting Time: 2.5 seconds (-2)
Other Aspects:
Components (-1): 1-decimeter square cloth (ordinary)
Gestures (-2): Mime wiping away something with the cloth (fairly simple)
Incantations (-1): “Arcane blight, begone!” (phrase)
Other Conditions (-1): Must specify at casting a single spell to target
The successful casting of diminish reduces the duration
of the targeted spell by up to 10 minutes. When a caster
attempts to affect a given spell, compare the skill total used
to cast diminish to the skill total used to create the offend -
ing spell. If the diminish spell total is equal or higher than
the targeted spell’s skill total, the spell duration is reduced.
Spells with 10 minutes or less of duration left on them cease
to function. Only one diminish spell can reduce the duration
of any particular spell.
Erosion
Skill: Alteration
Arcane Knowledge: death, time
Difficulty: 12
Effect: 18 (6D physical damage)
Range: 40 meters (+8)
Speed: Instantaneous (+8)
Duration: 1 second (+0)
Casting Time: 1 minute (-9)
Other Aspects:
Area Effect (+5): Sphere with radius of 1 meter
Components (-2): A gram of sand (ordinary, destroyed)
Gestures (-1): Fling sand at the target area while the incantation is uttered (simple)
Incantations (-2): “Time the healer, time the stealer, once thought by all to forever last, now it is most assuredly past.” (sentence)
Other Conditions (-1): Affects nonliving matter only
Erosion allows the chronomancer to rapidly accelerate the
breakdown of nonliving matter. Upon the successful casting
of this spell, a mage may cause a small sphere’s worth of
material to crumble to dust as it succumbs to the onslaught
of time. Any living matter in the affected area is unharmed
by the spell, although any structural effects caused by the
magic may still be dangerous. Erosion can be utilized topple
large structures and cause general chaos for the unwary.
The availability of erosion’s material component makes the
magic popular for mages who find themselves imprisoned.
Thus, it is not uncommon for jailers who have experience in
confining wizards to bind and sometimes keep their charges
blindfolded for the duration of their incarceration.
(((illo s1-2)))
Loophole
Skill: Apportation
Arcane Knowledge: magic, time
Difficulty: 29
Effect: 45 (+6D to one Magic skill and affecting one spell, specified at spell casting, that the target wishes to cast quickly)
Range: 3.5 meters (+3)
Speed: Instantaneous (+3)
Duration: 1 minute (+9)
Casting Time: 1 round (-4)
Other Aspects:
Components (-4): A 30 cubic centimeter vial of ink (very common, destroyed)
Feedback (-1): -1 to damage resistance total
Focused (+10): On target
Gestures (-1): Fling the ink at target while uttering the incantation (simple)
Incantations (-1): “Quickly cast quiet creations.” (phrase)
Other Conditions (-1): Not usable on spells with incantations, gestures, or concentration requirements
Every once in a while, one just does not have enough time
to deal with the current situation and needs a little help from
a friend. Loophole serves just this purpose as it causes time
around the intended target to “blink.” This effect hastens
the recipient forward in time, which allows the person to
shorten the casting time of one spell by 75% (round up, with
a maximum reduced casting time ofone minute). The spell
difficulty increases by +20, but the target’s skill increases
by 6D to compensate for this. The recipient of this spell
can perform no other action outside of the casting of the
intended spell.
The ink disappears once the target casts the spell.
Lotus Dreams
Skill: Alteration
Arcane Knowledge: dreams, time
Difficulty: 18
Effect: 21 (Accelerated Healing (R7), +7D bonus to natural healing attempts)
Range: Touch (+0)
Speed: Instantaneous (+0)
Duration: 1 day (+25)
Casting Time: 1 minute (-9)
Other Aspects:
Components (-8): 3 grams of incense made from crushed lotus petals (uncommon, destroyed)
Countenance (-1): Skin turns an unhealthy pale tone for the duration of the spell
Focused (+9): On target
Gestures (-3):Gently closes the eyes of the recipient and traces the lines of the bony plates that compose the skull of the intended recipient as the incantation is uttered (complex; sleight of hand roll with difficulty of 11)
Incantations (-2): “Though your mortal form has been rent asunder, embrace life and drink deeply from the draught of endless slumber.” (sentence)
Other Alterants (+4): Target cannot be awakened
When this magic is successfully cast upon a willing recipi-
ent, the target falls into a deep, coma-like slumber that lasts
for a full 24 hours. After the recipient awakens from his life-
renewing respite, the spell’s effect grants him a +7D modifier
to natural healing roll for the day.
During the spell’s duration it is impossible for the recipient
to waken or be awakened normally. Those with telepathic or
similar powers can contact them mentally but the answers
given come sluggishly and are typically one or two words.
This is in addition to aging from the normal passage of
time. Although uncommon, it is not unheard of for those
who emerge from the lotus dreams induced sleep to complain
of experiencing a vertigo effect during the spell. Some are
hesitant to receive the benefits of the spell a second time
unless they are near death.
Perceptive Flux
Skill: Alteration
Arcane Knowledge: time
Difficulty: 14
Effect: 15 (Hindrance: Initiative (R5), -10 to all initiative totals)
Range: 10 meters (+5)
Speed: Instantaneous (+5)
Duration: 1 round (+4)
Casting Time: 1 minute (-9)
Other Aspects:
Components (-4): A gram of sandstone (very common, destroyed)
Countenance (-1): Skin turns a sickly gray color for the duration of the spell
Gestures (-2): Crush sandstone and drop it to the floor (fairly simple)
Multiple Targets (+15): Up to 5 targets
Perceptive flux is an extremely useful spell for covert opera-
tions as it can give strike teams a definite tactical advantage.
Although it takes some time to prepare the magic, the spell’s
lack of verbal aspects can make it well worth casting.
At the end of a successful casting, the opponents think it’s
a different time than it actually is, causing several seconds
of disorientation.
The minimum initiative total an opponent can generate is
zero, which means that he goes last in the round.
Push
Skill: Apportation
Arcane Knowledge: time
Difficulty: 10
Effect: 14 (sends a small object up to 10 minutes into the future)
Range: Touch (+0)
Speed: Instantaneous (+0)
Duration: 10 minutes (+14)
Casting Time: 1 round (-4)
Other Aspects:
Gestures (-2): Wave one hand across the object to be pushed and then touch it (fairly simple)
Incantations (-2): “Where did it go?” (sentence)
Even the most subtle of things can sometimes make all the
difference in the world. Push takes an object of a kilogram or
less in weight and transports it up to 10 minutes forward in
time. The spell is popular with charlatans, con artists, stage
magicians, and pranksters. Once the spell runs its course,
the pushed object appears exactly where it was before the
spell was cast. It is affected by any environmental changes
upon its return.
(((illo s1-3)))
Seize the Day!
Skill: Conjuration
Arcane Knowledge: inanimate forces
Difficulty: 10
Effect: 9 (Fast Reactions (R1), +1D to initiative roll and one additional free action)
Range: 25 meters (+7)
Speed: Instantaneous (+7)
Duration: 1 round (+4)
Casting Time: 1 second (-0)
Other Aspects:
Components (-4): A pinch of gunpowder (very common, destroyed)
Gestures (-2): Swallow gunpowder while looking at target (fairly simple)
Incantations (-2):”Go!” (phrase, loud)
This spell allows someone of the caster’s choosing to gain an
extra action and a +1D bonus to initiatve for one round. This
boon occurs even if the target has already acted in the given
round. To cast the spell, the mage swallows the gunpowder,
looks at the target, and shouts the incantation.
Sequester
Skill: Apportation
Arcane Knowledge: dimension, time
Difficulty: 26
Effect: 11 (moves up to 150 kilograms)
Range: Self (+0)
Speed: Instantaneous (+0)
Duration: 1 week (+29)
Casting Time: 1 minute (-9)
Other Aspects:
Components (-10): A platinum ankh (very rare, destroyed)
Concentration (-3): 25 seconds with a willpower/mettle difficulty of 9
Countenance (-2): Skin takes on a bluish shade for the duration of the spell and the subconscious is haunted by psychic images
Gestures (-3): Make a circling motion above head with one hand, then quickly casts the ankh away after pushing it against her forehead (complex; acrobatics roll with a difficulty of 11)
Feedback (-4): -4 to damage resistance total
Focused (+8): On caster
Incantations (-2): “Safe from all harm but as close as a whisper, untouchable now for I am sequestered.” (sentence)
Variable Duration (+8): On/off switch
Other Alterants (+29): Moves caster out of space and time
When things look their bleakest, it is good to have an ace
up one’s sleeve. Sequester allows a mage to gain protection by
sliding between the present and future. The successful cast-
ing of the spell removes her from the flow of time for up to
one week and deposits her in an alternate dimension where
time stands still. During this period in the alien realm, she
does not age, nor can she perform any actions. Her form is
undetectable by normal means, although a detect resonance
reveals her presence.
When the caster turns off the spell or the spell runs its
course, the mage is returned to the exact spot she started
from when she fled from her current time. The re-emergence
into the normal time stream could be quite perilous for the
temporal traveler, as she must survive any changes to her
current environment.
Some chronomancers fear the time spent in sequester
because their subconscious is tormented with horrible psychic
images as it attempts to adjust to it current state. In rare cases,
those who seek refuge through sequester develop emotional
quirks and in sometimes never fully regain their sanity.
Soulecho
Skill: Conjuration
Arcane Knowledge: death, time
Difficulty: 11
Effect: 9 (Bad Luck (R3))
Range: 1 meter (+0)
Speed: Instantaneous (+0)
Duration: 25 minutes (+16)
Casting Time: 10 minutes (-14)
Other Aspects:
Components (-8): 100 grams of bone dust (uncommon, destroyed)
Gestures (-3): After the incantation is uttered, the bone dust is used to mark the area of effect. The caster then spends the rest of the casting time touching the area of effect and slowly acting as if pulling malevolent energy from the ground. (complex; acrobatics roll with a difficulty of 11)
Feedback (-4): -4 to damage resistance total
Focused (+6): On targets
Incantations (-4): “The sins of the past shall surely last. Sorrow forever surrounds us all. Ne’er let one forget how the die was cast. Come ye forth, oh misery; heed my call!” (litany; persuasion roll with difficulty of 15)
Multiple Targets (+24): Up to 8 targets
Although time often heals wounds, it seldom ever forgets
the misery it has been forced to endure in ages past. The pain
of horrible events left buried by the sands of time seethes
and festers as it cries out for vengeance. This volatile, ter -
rible power is the chronomancer’s to wield. Such wizards can
gather the twisted fragments of tortured chronal resonances
and vent the destructive force upon the object of their wrath.
Power such as this is not unleashed lightly, though, and usu-
ally done quite covertly. Wise temporal magicians choose to
tread carefully because many people would prefer to forget
the sorrows of the past and leave the undisturbed misery of
ages long gone buried by the dust of the passing years. Those
who disregard the potential danger of daring to manipulate
sorrows of other times run the risk of angering the local
populace. Fools of this nature are not often long lived and
have found themselves burnt at the stake or worse as they
pay the ultimate price for their haughtiness.
The successful casting of a soulecho creates a field of eldritch
energy that feeds upon the pain of the past and forces it
upon the affected area. Those who are unfortunate enough
the pass through the temporal blighted area (upt to eight
victims) attract the Bad Luck (R3) Disadvantage (for the
duration of the spell).
(((illo s1-4)))
Suppress
Skill: Alteration
Arcane Knowledge: magic, time
Difficulty: 14
Effect: 18 (-4D to physical damage rolls; only affects attack spells)
Range: 40 meters (+8)
Speed: Instantaneous (+8)
Duration: 1 round (+4)
Casting Time: 1 round (-4)
Other Aspects:
Components (-2): Three dried leaves of any variety (ordinary, destroyed)
Feedback (-2): -2 to damage resistance total
Gestures (-2): Crush the leaves and flick them at the target (fairly simple)
Other Conditions (-1): Must specify one school to be affected by casting
This powerful mystic manipulation allows the chrono -
mancer to deftly manipulate the temporal fields around a
given target, much like a skilled surgeon is able to separate
and extract malignant tissue without harming the patient.
When suppress is successfully cast, the victim is moved slightly
out of sync with the normal time stream, which temporarily
weakens the ability to cause harm to others with magic.
When this spell is cast, the wizard chooses a specific school
of magic to affect. For the duration of the spell, any spells
that cause physical damage from the chosen school and cast
by the victim have the damage roll reduced by 4D (with a
minimum total of zero).
Temporal Shackles
Skill: Conjuration
Arcane Knowledge: magic, time
Difficulty: 12
Effect: 23 (damage resistance total of the shackles)
Range: 15 meters (+6)
Speed: Instantaneous (+6)
Duration: 1 minute (+9)
Casting Time: 1 minute (-9)
Other Aspects:
Components (-8): A 3-centimeter-long piece of quartz (uncommon, destroyed)
Focused (+6): On target
Gestures (-2): Simulate a whirlpool motion with hands while uttering the incantation and then appear to toss the spell toward the target (fairly simple)
Incantations (-2): “A past full of suffering, echoes of futures bleak, though you vainly strain ’gainst my power, your will grows weak!” (sentence)
Unreal Effect (-6): Disbelief difficulty of 13
Those who are not familiar with the intricacies of time
can often fall prey to the machinations of those who have
mastered it. Temporal shackles holds a victim fast with bands
of chronal energy that alternate between past and future
waves of power. If a mage’s marksmanship/firearms or apport-
ation total is greater than the target’s combat difficulty, his
quarry is trapped.
The effect’s value plus the result point bonus serve as
the damage resistance total of the shackles. The target can
disbelieve and thus free herself with a Perception/Acumen or
investigation total of 13.
Time Out of Mind
Skill: Alteration
Arcane Knowledge: magic, time
Difficulty: 15
Effect: 37 (compare to the skill total of the spell countering)
Range: 10 meters (+5)
Speed: Instantaneous (+5)
Duration: 1 round (+4)
Casting Time: 1 round (-4)
Other Aspects:
Components (-4): 2 candles (very common, destroyed)
Concentration (-4): 1 minute with a willpower/mettle difficulty of 10
Feedback (-3): -3 to damage resistance total
Incantations (-3): “Time unyielding, destinies past. Forever onward, the die has been cast. Through fate’s dire portal, great powers await. Fear thee not, mere mortal: it is not yet too late!” (complex; persuasion roll with difficulty of 15)
Gestures (-3): Once the incantation is complete, stretch arms out over the center of the target, then spread arms out wide while holding the candles and tracing the surface of the afflicted. Finally, quickly reach upward and then make a slashing movement as the arms are quickly dropped. (complex; acrobatics roll with difficulty of 11)
Time out of mind allows the mage to reach out mentally
and feel the chronal waves that surround the spell’s intended
beneficiary. Through this temporal gift, the caster can free a
bedeviled soul from a malicious spell or enchantment that
has been cast upon her. If the mage’s efforts are successful,
the subject is released from the harmful magic by temporar-
ily having her chronal essence backwards in time to a point
where it was free of the baneful magic. Once the spells target
is loosed from arcane tribulation and the spell is broken, the
essence rises forward in time and returns to the proper place
in the time stream.
Time Sink
Skill: Chronomancy
Arcane Knowledge: time
Difficulty: 25
Effect: 15 (1 metric ton of material stopped)
Range: 10 meters (+5)
Speed: Instantaneous (+5)
Duration: 1 minute (+9)
Casting Time: 1 round (-4)
Other Aspects:
Area Effect (+15): Sphere with a radius of 3 meters
Components (-2): A snail shell (ordinary, destroyed)
Gestures (-1): Spreads arms wide in a circle, mimicking the sphere to be created (simple)
Incantations (-1): “Apart from time!” (phrase)
Other Alterants (+9): Time stopped in area of effect
Sometimes to save the day, one must seize the moment —
literally — and bring everything to a sudden halt. Time sink
was designed just for this purpose. The successful casting this
spell temporarily stops the effects of time in a limited area.
The spell affects both living and nonlinving targets, up to
1,000 kilograms total, including rain, flying projectiles, and
collapsing structures. The caster is also subject to the spell’s
effect if he includes himself in the area of effect.
Additionally, anything entering the area of effect stops
— bullets or shrapnel hitting the edge halt as they enter
the area, people pause as soon as they’re completely inside,
and so on.
Once the duration of the spell wears off, the snail shell frac-
tures and crumbles to dust. When this occurs, all temporally
suspended objects and effects resume their prior course and
motion: Bullets and shrapnel continue toward their intended
targets, people finish their actions, and the like.
Withering Sand
Skill: Alteration
Arcane Knowledge: death, folk, time
Difficulty: 12
Effect: 6 (Age: Old (R2), +1 to difficulties of physical actions and +3 to interaction difficulties when attempting to deal with much younger people)
Range: 25 meters (+7)
Speed: Instantaneous (+7)
Duration: 10 minutes (+14)
Casting Time: 1 round (-4)
Other Aspects:
Components (-6): 60 grams of refined white sand (common, destroyed)
Gestures (-2): Toss sand at intended target and then run fingers of the same hand across the mage’s scalp from front to back (fairly simple)
Focused (+4): On target
Incantations (-3): “Youth’s sweet flower soon fades and grows sour. Life is often lived in vane, for in the end all must wane. Your essence I draw hither. Before your sight, watch it wither!” (complex; persuasion roll with difficulty of 11)
Angered chronomancers are often wicked, vindictive crea-
tures, and one crosses them at his own peril. Withering sand
is but a sample of the serving of pain the temporal titans can
dish out to those who draw their ire. The successful casting
of this spell temporarily afflicts the target with the Age: Old
(R2) Disadvantage. This spell only affects living creatures
and bestows a +1 penalty to the difficulty of physical actions
and +3 to any attempts to interact with those who would
be prejudiced against elderly people. Those who are already
affected by the Age: Old (R2) Disadvantage have all related
modifiers doubled.
(((open sidebar — may be placed anywhere in the chro -
nomancy chapter)))
The Book of Long Years
The time-tossed, tattered tome that is collectively
known as the Book of Long Years is thought to have
been penned first upon scrolls carved from the backs
of willing sacrifices in ancient Egypt by Ahmut Sadon,
a diabolically brilliant sorcerer. Little is known of the
arcane master save for his orchestrating the month-long
ceremony to prepare his victims; both the wizard and
the newly scribed works disappeared shortly after the
incantations were finished. The mage would never be
heard from again. His work, however, took on a life of
its own. What eventually became the Book of Long Years
would not see the light of day for centuries.
As time passed, Sadon’s work slipped through the
greedy hands of several petty wizards who sought to
exploit his writings to increase their power. Most were
megalomaniacal fools who squandered the chance they
were given. Every so often, though, the sorcerer’s scrolls
wound up in the hands of someone who was perceptive
enough to realize their true potential.
One such mistress of magical might was a Grecian
sage by the name of Helana Orlasis. She spent several
years of her life chasing rumors before finally bartering
for the scrolls near ancient Athens. With her prize in
hand, she fled to self-imposed exile so that she could
decipher them. Unfortunately, before she could profit
from her findings, an assassin’s knife cut her life short.
The scrolls, along with critical portions Helana’s nota-
tions, vanished. They were presumed to have been
spirited away by her murderer.
It would take the far-flung legions of a  caesar to
unearth the lost knowledge. Agents loyal to their
emperor, brought the efforts of Ahmut and Helana,
to Rome where it was bound and locked away from
prying eyes for years. On occasion, DiCarthi Mede -
cian, a seemingly minor scribe, would steal away from
his appointed tasks and delved into the lost writings.
Though it took the budding chronomancer some long
sessions to decipher the cryptic verse, the effort was
well worth the time. Once he had absorbed the arcane
knowledge, DiCarthi began to rise to his full potential
and soon wielded impressive might. He translated
both the Egyptian and Grecian writings into his native
tongue and later added theories based on what he had
discovered. DiCarthi named the collective work the Book
of Long Years. As with Ahmut, Medecian would vanish
along with his prize. Rome had fulfilled its usefulness,
and destiny called.
As the years passed, the book became much sought
after, and several renowned wizards have claimed to
possess it. Some added spells of their own design, and
the tome’s legend grew. Although many of its owners
met with untimely deaths, the tome survived.
The Book of Long Years resides within battered,
plain, russet, leather covers. Its corners and spine are
adorned with modest brass fittings, and the tome’s sole
decoration is a small silver rune that depicts Ahmut’s
mark. The pages are ichor stained, and their edges are
feathered from ages of wear and abuse.
Contents: Within the pages of the Book of Long Years
lies a wealth of information and the collected works of
Sadon, Althala, Medician, and others who have added
to the legacy. It’s an attractive prize for those who delve
into the chronomantic arts. The original versions of
several chronomancy spells lurk therein also, including
ancestral curse (devolution), folkmoot (earth muse), mind
reel (perceptive flux), subjugate (suppress) and the curse
of Anubis (withering sand).
Protections: The book is not considered to be cursed
or otherwise protected.
Language: Most of the spells are writen in Latin
(even ones added later), but there are also notes  in
other languages and some of the original spells from
Helana and Ahumut.
Portions of the book have been copied into lesser
(though nonetheless prices) volumes. Many chrono -
mancers, sages, and collectors would give their eye
teeth for them. The ultimate prize, the legendary
scrolls of Ahumut, appears to have been forever lost
or at the very least hidden as only clever duplicates
have surfaced.
Reading Period/Difficulty: Delving into the pages
of the Book of Long Years is no small endeavor due to the
many transcriptions that the text has gone through. It
typically takes the average reader six months to fully
understand the tome’s contents and a successful Very
Difficult languages/reading/writing roll. One could sift
through its contents and to pick out specific spells by
making a Heroic languages/reading/writing roll and
spending two weeks poring through the tome. Once this
has been completed, individual spells can be learned at
a rate of one spell for every additional month spent in
study and another Very Difficulty languages/reading/
writing roll.
(((end sidebar)))

Necromancy
----------

Animate Dead
Skill: Conjuration
Arcane Knowledge: Enchanted
Difficulty: 14
Effect: 6 (Skill Bonus: Mindless (R1), +3 to willpower/mettle totals; Skill Bonus: Painless Wounds (R1), +3 to stamina total; attributes based on result points)
Range: 25 meters (+7)
Speed: Instantaneous (+7)
Duration: 1 hour (+18)
Casting Time: 1 minute (-9)
Other Aspects:
Components (-4): Complete skeleton or body (uncommon)
Focused (+4): On target
Incantations (-1): “Animate!” (phrase)
Any type of corporeal dead creature can be used for this
ritual. Whether it has been recently killed or dead for years
makes no difference, so long as it is physically intact. Upon
completing the spell, the dead creature is animated but not
living.
The result points of the spell determine the attributes,
Body Points, and Wound levels of the animated dead. The
attributes equal in dice the points above the difficulty. Body
Points equal the result points plus 10. Wound levels equal
the half of the result points (round up). Movement equals
the result points in meters.
Generally rather stupid, the caster can attempt to control
them through simple commands. Left to their own devices,
they attack anything near them.
Animate Superior Undead
Skill: Conjuration
Arcane Knowledge: Enchanted
Difficulty: 25
Effect: 33 (+2D to Physique/Strength; +1D to  Acumen/Perception; +1D to attribute for brawling/fighting and melee combat; Skill Bonus: Mindless (R1), +3 to willpower/mettle totals; Skill Bonus: Painless Wounds (R1), +3 to stamina total; attributes and movement based on result points)
Range: 25 meters (+7)
Speed: Instantaneous (+7)
Duration: 1 day (+25)
Casting Time: 1 hour (-18)
Other Aspects:
Components (-5): Recently dead, complete corpse (very rare)
Concentration (-5): 15 minutes with willpower/mettle difficulty of 11
Focus (+11): On target
Gestures (-2): Repeatedly raise hands above target, as if encouraging it to get up (fairly simple)
Incantations (-3): “Come to life and fight for me, my undead minion!” (sentence, loud)
The body needed for the ritual must be completely intact,
and dead no longer than 24 hours. After an hour of prepara-
tion, the corpse takes on a pseudo-life. The result points of
the spell determine the attributes, Body Points, and Wound
levels of the skeletons. The attributes equal in dice the points
above the difficulty. Body Points equal the result points plus
10. Wound levels equal the half of the result points (round up).
Movement equals the result points in meters. The Physique/
Strength attribute also gets +2D to it, the Acumen/Perception
score goes up by 1D, and  brawling/fighting and melee combat
each equal +1D above the related attribute score.
Superior undead have minds of their own. Though they
can understand more than rudimentary commands, this also
means that they are as likely to turn on their creator should
she fail command them properly as they are to continue on
their designated course of action.
Call Tomb Fiend
Skill: Apportation
Arcane Knowledge: Entity
Difficulty: 20
Effect: 39 (compare to planar distance)
Range: 1 meter (+0)
Speed: Instantaneous (+0)
Duration: 1 day (+25)
Casting Time: 1 round (-4)
Other Aspects:
Components (-3): Dried flesh (common)
Incantations (-3): “Awaken from the immortal shadow!” (sentence, loud)
Other Conditions (-3): In a tomb or near a burial ground
When summoned, the tomb fiend comes to the aid of the
mage. The creature is not very sizable, and it does not make
an ideal combatant. But, for the purpose of being a servant,
it works wonderfully. Although this stubby and stooped
creature has talons, they are for climbing, not fighting. Fur-
thermore, comprehending the caster’s universe is a difficult
task, making commanding the fiend a challenge.
Commands must be given in simple noun-verb sentences.
The tomb fiend can’t understand anything more complex.
((( insert illo s3-1 tomb fiend)))
(((begin sidebar)))
Tomb Fiend
Typical Tomb Fiend: Reflexes 4D, climbing 2D+2, con-
tortion 1D+1, dodge 3D+1, sneaking 2D+2 Coordination
3D, Physique 2D, running 1D+2, Intellect 2D, traps 2D+1
Acumen 4D, hide 2D+2, search 2D+1, survival 2D, tracking
1D+2, Charisma 3D, mettle 1D+1 Move: 10. Strength Damage:
1D. Fate Points: 0. Character Points: 0. Body Points: 10/Wound
levels: 1. Natural Ability: teeth (Strength Damage only).
(((end sidebar)))
Capture Life force
Skill: Alternation
Arcane Knowledge: Death
Difficulty: 17
Effect: 10 (1 human-sized being held in stasis)
Range: 5 meters (+4)
Speed: Instantaneous (+4)
Duration: 1 month (+32)
Casting Time: 1 hour (-18)
Other Aspects:
Components (-4): Box mad of bone (rare)
Concentration (-2): Must concentrate for 30 minutes
Focused (+8): Bone box
This spell allows a magic user to capture the soul of a living
creature, and lock it away for the spell’s duration. During this
period, the target’s body is not dead; it is in stasis. When cast,
the only visible effect is that the target’s body becomes relaxed
if the spell is successful. At this point, bone box contains the
soul of the person. Time does not pass for those affected by
this spell. Dreams and thought are not possible, life simple
stops and only starts when the spell is ended. The caster can
choose to end the spell early if she chooses.
If the target’s body is destroyed during the spell’s period,
the soul cannot be returned to the living world. Instead,
at the end of the spell, the soul is lost to the neither world.
This spell is not only used to make prisoners of enemies, but
often used to prolong the life of a dying friend. If it is cast
before death, the body can be carried to someone capable
of healing the character. However, the lifeforce must be
returned to the body before it can be healed. Other uses for
this spell are to prevent aging during travel, or the exhaus -
tion of traveling — allowing someone else to carry the bone
box and transporting the body in a casket.
Cold Flesh
Skill: Alteration
Arcane Knowledge: Death
Difficulty: 16
Effect: 18 (+4D to disguise [con: disguise in D6 Space] against undead or machines)
Range: Touch (+0)
Speed: Instantaneous (+0)
Duration: 1 hour (+18)
Casting Time: 1 minute (-9)
Other Aspects:
Components (-1): iron filings (uncommon)
Focused (+7): On target
Gestures (-1): Sprinkle filings on target (simple)
This spell disguises a living being from detection by the non-
living by masking the target’s body ambient temperature.
Undead creatures or heat sensing device cannot sense the
target. The effects of this spell last until either the duration
expires or the target attacks or threatens any non-living
entity or machine that is being deceived. If the player char-
acter is trained in disguise, then the modifier from the spell
is added to the skill.
Consuming Sphere
Skill: Conjuration
Arcane Knowledge: Death
Difficulty: 30
Effect: 30 (6D+2, ignores nonmagical armor)
Range: 15 meters (+6)
Speed: Instantaneous (+6)
Duration: 3 rounds (+6)
Casting Time: 2.5 seconds (-2)
Other Aspects:
Area Effect (+15): 3-meter sphere
Feedback (-2): -2 to damage resistance total
Gestures (-1): Rolling motion with hands (simple)
Incantations (-2): “Consume them!” (sentence)
Variable Movement (+3): Movement of 12.5 meters per round
This spell produces a 3-meter sphere of pulsating dark energy
that rolls across the ground, doing damage to all living matter
it encounters. The trajectory of the sphere cannot be changed
once the spell is cast. However, as it is not instantaneous,
there is a possibility potential targets can avoid encountering
this deadly conjuration, providing it is seen. During daylight
hours, a search of Easy is required; during night, or in dark-
ness, a search of Very Difficult is required. Also, avoidance
requires that the character has time to dive clear.
The sphere consumes life energy. This means that nonmagi-
cal armor offers no protection against it. None of this energy
increases the damage of the sphere, nor is it conveyed to the
magic user. Victims who die as a result, quickly whither, leav-
ing only bones and dust behind. Non-living material such as
armor weapons and so on are not affected.
Conqueror Worm
Skill: Conjuration
Arcane Knowledge: Death
Difficulty: 19
Effect: 30
Range: Touch (+0)
Speed: Instantaneous (+0)
Duration: 3 weeks (+31)
Casting Time: 2 days (-27)
Other Aspects:
Components (-3): Earthworm (common)
Focused (+12): On target
Incantations (-3): Repeated incantations of un-life; an willpower/mettle roll with a difficulty 11 must be made during each day of casting (complex)
Other Condition (-2): After the spell is cast, the magic user must find a way to get a victim to swallow the foul creation.
Often the worm can be hidden in food or drink — alcohol
cannot kill it. If it is not consumed within 24 hours after the
spell’s casting, the worm dies and is useless. An Acumen or
Perception roll with a 10 difficulty must be performed by the
intended victim to detect the presence of the worm.
This spell prepares the component for the spell Monstrous
Creation By transforming the positive living energy of a
simple earthworm, the magic user creates an evil seed that is
usually unwittingly consumed by an intended victim. Often,
the victim is one of the caster’s own henchmen, as once the
worm is ingested, it becomes a parasite, waiting for the proper
magic to transform it a fell creature that devours its host. By
using a henchman, the spell is ready to be activated at will.
Certainly there is a cost in acolytes and followers, but those
can easily be replaced.
Corpse Fog *
Skill: Conjuration
Arcane Knowledge: Air
Difficulty:32
Effect: 27 (+D6 to hide)
Range: 60 meters (+9)
Speed: Instantaneous (+5)0 (+9)
Duration: 2 minutes (+10)
Casting Time: 2 rounds (-5)
Other Aspects:
Area Effect (+20): 10-meter radius
Components (-4): Earth from a graveyard (rare)
Gestures (-2): Fanning of hands (simple)
Variable Movement (+1): Movement of 5 meters per round
Other Conditions (-4): While this spell does not require the caster to be standing in a graveyard, it must be a location where the living have fallen and are now beneath the surface. Such areas can be ancient cities, battlefields, potters fields, disaster sites, etc.
When commencing this spell, the caster must toss the earth
from a graveyard into the air, followed by the prescribed
hand motions. For this spell to work properly, the caster
must be on ground where dead are buried. It is the decaying
foulness of the dead that the caster pulls from the earth
to obscure the surrounding area, creating a dense fog that
hangs in the air.
Dead Man’s Gaze
Cantrip
Skill: Divination
Arcane Knowledge: Death
Difficulty: 3
Effect: 4 (5 seconds)
Range: 5 meters (+4)
Speed: Instantaneous (+4)
Duration: 1 round (+4)
Casting Time: 2 rounds (-5)
Other Aspects:
Components (-2): 2 copper coins (very common)
Gestures (-1): Place coins on eyes of the deceased (simple)
Incantations (-2): “What do I see with your eyes?” (sentence)
If the last moments of a dead man’s life are frozen on his
retinas, then this spell can reveal them. Once the coins are in
place and the spell successfully completed,the caster can try
to gain information. First the coins are removed, and then
the deceased’s eyes gazed upon. The gamemaster determines
the result points needed from casting the spell, basing it
upon how traumatic the final moments were. For example,
if a character was brutally murdered, then it could require
up to four points to see the killer’s face, but probably nine
to 12to discern background details. The reason for this is
due to the fact that the victim likely spent his last moments
of existence fixed upon the murder’s countenance. The spell
reveals nothing other than the last few seconds of life.
Dead Sight *
Skill: Divination
Arcane Knowledge: Magic
Difficulty: 14
Effect: 6 (search skill of 2D)
Range: 100 meters (+10)
Speed: Instantaneous (+10)
Duration: 5 minutes (+12)
Casting Time: 2 rounds (-5)
Other Aspects:
Components (-5): 2 eyes of a recently killed creature — of the type the spells is targeted on (very rare)
Concentration (-2): Others can be present when the caster is viewing with this spell, but there is a chance that interacting with the caster will cause a failure; willpower/ mettle roll at 8 once for each interaction to disrupt is required — use.
Focused (+3): On target
Incantations (-2): “And the dead shall see.” (sentence)
The caster gains the sight of the undead target. While the
target’s movement cannot be controlled without another
magic, the eyes of the target become the eyes of the caster,
replacing the all-normal vision until the spell is ended or
disrupted. During the spells operation, the caster relies upon
the 2D search of the undead target, and dark and alien world.
Untested casters must take a mettle test the first few times
this spell is used. Once practiced enough, the morbid nature
of the “dead vision” no longer disturbs the viewer. How many
times this takes is dependent upon the nature of what is
being seen, and left to the gamemaster’s discretion. Until the
caster has become accustomed to this level of morbidity, a
willpower/mettle roll should be made after a successful casting
of the spell. Failure results in the immediately halting the
magic, and a visibly shaken mage for several minutes. The
spell can be ended at any time.
Deadspeak
Skill: Conjuration
Arcane Knowledge: Death
Difficulty: 28
Effect: 48 (4D languages/speaking , 4D intimidation,  4D investigation)
Range: 1 meter (+0)
Speed: Instantaneous (+0)
Duration: 24 hours (+18)
Casting Time: 1 minute (-9)
Other Aspects:
Components (-8): Dried flesh, writing device, human blood (uncommon)
Focused (+13): On target
Gestures (-2): Write incantation upon the dried flesh (fairly simple)
Incantations (-1): Arcane phrase (phrase)
Other Conditions (-2): Requires a dead body that at least has the skull intact — flesh is not required.
Once the components of this spell have been used, they are
useless for future casting of the spell. New materials must
be acquired. But casting this spell grants many benefits. The
dead have much to say, particularly those who have been
recently murdered. As in life, there is an art to interrogat -
ing the unliving; sometimes guile must be used, other times
force is required. The approach needed is determined by the
gamemaster and the situation. The target of the spell gains
4D in the language of the dead, as well as the skill necessary
to investigate and intimidate an pulse-less subject. All difficulty
levels, whether they are opposed rolls or predetermined are
set by the gamemaster.
Dead Things
Skill: Conjuration
Arcane Knowledge: Death
Difficulty: 25
Effect: 23 (5D)
Range: 5 meters (+10)
Speed: Instantaneous (+10)
Duration: 1minute (+9)
Casting Time: 1 round (-4)
Other Aspects:
Components (-4): various body parts and extremities (very rare)
Feedback (-2): -2 to damage resistance total
Focused (+6): On each extremity
Incantations (-2): “Live! I give you life!” (sentence)
Multi-Target (+3): 1 extremity (cumulative +3 to the Difficulty Number for each additional extremity)
The mage can give life to various severed extremities in a
10 meter radius by sacrificing a part of her life energy. Once
cast, any once living extremity in the area of effect comes
to life, crawling, wiggling, scampering or rolling toward any
living enemy the caster indicates. Typically this spell is used
upon hands, legs, fingers, heads, anything that can cause
damage. The amount of damage from a claw, bite or scratch
is determined by the number of points assigned to it.
To determine how man dead things come to life, the caster
assigns up to a total of 5D points to each by rolling. 1 point
is required for an extremity to move and attack. Likewise, it
can suffer only 1 point of damage before being destroyed. This
means if the caster rolls 12, then 2 points can be assigned
to all potential targets within the spell’s area of effect. In
this case, 6 various body parts begin to move and engage in
combat. The points can be divided unequally. Regardless of
how high the dice rolls, an entire body cannot be animated
— only extremities. The dead things can be merely bone or
have flesh and muscle, it makes no difference. It is the life
energy of the caster that gives them life.
(((insert illo s3-2 dead things)))
Death’s Hand
Skill: Conjuration
Arcane Knowledge: Death
Difficulty: 17
Effect: 30 (10D damage)
Range: 5 meters (+4)
Speed: Instantaneous (+5)
Duration: 1 round (+4)
Casting Time: 1 round (-4)
Other Aspects:
Components (-4): skeletal hand (rare)
Focused (+6): On Target
Gestures (-1): point skeletal hand at target (simple)
Incantations (-2): “Grasp the heart of my enemy.” (sentence)
This spell is of the darkest arts, calling upon the evil powers
to consume the vital energy of a target’s heart, halting its
beating, bringing death. The proper component is needed for
the type of a target. To use this spell on a human requires a
skeletal human hand; to target a specific monster requires
the hand (or claw) of the type of targeted monster.
Drain Essence
Skill: Alteration
Arcane Knowledge: Enchanted
Difficulty: 12
Effect: 9 (-2D from Physique attribute)
Range: 3 meters (+4)
Speed: Instantaneous (+4)
Duration: 5 rounds (+6)
Casting Time: 1.5 seconds (-1)
Other Aspects:
Focused (+3): On target
Gestures (-1): Point (simple)
Incantations (-1): “Wither.” (phrase)
When the caster utters the incantation, dark arcs of energy
flash around the target, reducing Physique by -2D. Normal
armor doesn’t protect against this spell, as the target’s essence
is pulled from the body through the material. Magical protec-
tion does hinder the spell, reducing damage as normal. The
victim remains in this state for the duration of this spell,
and the caster does not gain the extracted energy. After the
spell is disrupted or ends, the target’s Physique returns to
normal.
Duncan’s Malicious Contagion
Skill: Conjuration
Arcane Knowledge: Death
Difficulty: 32
Effect: 45 (10D disease)
Range: Self (+0)
Speed: Instantaneous (+0)
Duration: 1 year (+38)
Casting Time: 1 month (-32)
Other Aspects:
Components (-3): rotting rodent or other vermin (common)
Focused (+16): On Target
Gestures (-1): Prick thumb with despoiled vermin blood (simple)
Incantations (-2): “By the pricking of my thumb, a malicious contagion this way comes.” (sentence)
Other Alternants (+3): While the caster is immune to the contagion she has created, she is a vector. All who come in contact must roll Physique at Easy, otherwise they become infected with the illness.
Few know this diabolical spell, as those who have learned of
its existence either promptly destroyed, or used it and were
discovered and in turn were killed by a rampaging populous
sick with a magical plague. The gamemaster should make
learning or finding this spell very difficult and the ramifica-
tions well known to the caster. It is reasoned that the spell
was developed in time of war, a weapon of siege. Others
ventured that the spell served the revenge of its namesake.
The truth may never be known. Nonetheless, its effects can
be devastating.
Once successfully cast, the mage is immune to the conta-
gion. Still, she is free to roam around a populated area, and
all who come into physical contact must make a Physique roll
of Easy. Failure means the person suffers 1D bleeding sores
within 24 hours. Each day these sores spread, increasing by
another +1D, eventually covering the entire body in suppu-
rating wounds to a maximum of 10D wounds; if a character
survives this, then she has survived the sickness. Likewise,
any person who comes into contact with this infected person
must make a Physique/Strength roll at Easy, otherwise suf -
fer the same fate. Attempts to use medicine/healing produce
contact. If the infected are not promptly segregated, then all
who around them run the risk of contracting the contagion.
This magical malady can only be conveyed by living beings,
human or animal. After 1 year from the day of the casting,
the spell halts, regardless of the number of ill. The disease
stops spreading and promptly heats at a normal rate, vanish-
ing almost as quickly as it appeared.
Enthrall Undead
Skill: Alteration
Arcane Knowledge: Enchanted
Difficulty: 18
Effect: 26 (charm undead skill bonus at +5D+2)
Range: Self (+0)
Speed: Instantaneous (+0)
Duration: 1 hour (+18)
Casting Time: 1 round (-4)
Other Aspects:
Components (-4): Raw flesh (rare)
Focused (+8): On target
Gestures (-2): Snap fingers while tossing the component on the ground before the target (fairly simple)
Unreal Effect (-6): Disbelief difficulty of 13
Often it is simpler for a magic user practiced in Necromancy
to befriend undead, rather than destroy them. This spell
permits one or more undead to be enthralled, falling under
the control of the caster. During this period, the targets
follow all instructions given — they naturally understand
the character who cast the spell. Mindless creatures such as
skeletons and zombies can be ordered to destroy themselves
or each other. But undead with limited cognitive capabilities
such as mummies and vampires are allowed a Very Difficult
willpower/mettle roll. A failure results in unquestioning obedi-
ence. A success causes them to ignore the command.
Fleshy Armor
Skill: Alteration
Arcane Knowledge: Death
Difficulty: 15
Effect: 14 (4D+2 armor)
Range: Self (+0)
Speed: Instantaneous (+0)
Duration: 1 day (+25)
Casting Time: 1minute (-9)
Other Aspects:
Components (-4): The flesh of a dead creature (very rare)
Concentration (-2): Because of the power of the incantation used, the caster must be alone and uninterrupted for the duration of the casting. No living being, other than the caster, can be within 5 meters.
Incantations (-2): A phrase that animates dead flesh, known only to those who study Death (sentence)
Focused (+7): On self
No armor can be worn for this spell to function properly.
As the casting commences, the dead flesh appears to meld
together, and crawl across the caster’s body, becoming a sec-
ond layer of skin. As this flesh is dead, it provides protection
from physical attacks. When the spell reaches the end of its
duration, the dead flesh becomes rank. By the last 30 minutes
of the spell, the dead flesh is putrid, suppurating nauseating
fluid. This atrocious odor acts as a warning for the wearer,
allowing her to know the spell is about to end. It also hinders
the protected person’s sense of smell (-1D Perception).
(((insert illo s3-3 fleshy armor)))
Ghoulish Paralysis
Skill: Alteration
Arcane Knowledge: Death
Difficulty: 12
Effect: 12 (Paralyzing Touch (4))
Range: Self (+0)
Speed: Instantaneous (+0)
Duration: 24 hours (+18)
Casting Time: 1 round (-4)
Other Aspects:
Components (-7): Claws of a ghoul (extremely rare)
Focused (+6): On Target
Incantations (-2): “Ghoul’s touch” (sentence)
A successful casting of this spell imbues the mage with the
Advantage Paralyzing Touch (4) as described in the “Character
Options” chapter. Before the victim of an attack can become
paralyzed, the mage must make find an unprotected location
that reveals flesh. The gamemaster might require a Perception
or a search roll at an appropriate difficulty to find such a spot
if one is readily evident.
(((begin sidebar — may be placed anywhere in necromancy
section)))
Tome Title: Immortal Phenomena
Description/History: This treatise on Necromancy is a lofty
800 handwritten pages, bound in what appears to be human
skin (a Perception roll of 15 is required to determine this, or
a medicine/healing roll of 5). There is only one such book in
existence, and it is highly coveted by those whom practice the
necromantic arts. Likewise, it is despised by many others from
various schools of magic deemed to reveal too much of the
hidden workings of Death This is apparent from the tattered
and burned edges. Many times has this grimoire been pulled
from a heap of burning books. The only inscription within
the book indicating the author is found in the title.
Contents: Besides containing a list of spells, the book has
many expositions and essays upon the black arts. After careful
study, the reader can improve her knowledge of Necromancy
by 1D. The spells included are: Animate Dead, Animate Supe-
rior Dead, Call Tomb Fiend, C orpse Fog, Death’s Hand, Drain
Essence, Fleshy Armor, Unliving Weapon.
Protections : none
Language: The tome is written in a common language of the
gamemaster’s choosing. However, it does require the reader
be skilled in magic, and a successful Magic roll of Difficult
to decipher the script, symbols and arcane terminology.
Without prolonged study, such a success allows the reader
to understand the nature of the text.
Reading Period: 6 months to read and comprehend. Each
month a Magic roll of Difficult is required. Only after 6 suc-
cessful months or reader has the contents been fully com -
prehended. At this time, Magic can be increased by +1D or 3
pips can be divided across alteration and conjuration.
(((end sidebar)))
Ghost Passage
Skill: Apportation
Arcane Knowledge: Dimension
Difficulty: 13
Effect: 10 (human size)
Range: Touch (+0)
Speed: Instantaneous (+0)
Duration: 1 hour (+18)
Casting Time: 1 round (-4)
Other Aspects:
Focused (+5): On target
Gestures (-1): Touch target upon forehead (simple)
Unreal Effect (-3): Disbelief difficulty of 13
After this spell is invoked, the target becomes ethereal, as does
her belongings. This allows her to move without a sound, at
normal movement. However, the movement is otherworldly
in that she appears to glide. Those who do not know she is
under the effect of a spell are likely to mistake her for a ghost
or spirit. Such characters need to make a Charisma/Presence
roll, or a willpower/mettle roll with a Difficulty of 13. The
unfortunates who mistake the target as an unearthly entity
flee until they no longer see the apparent apparition.
Additionally, this spell allows a hero to pass through physical
barriers up to 0.5 meters thick. For the duration of the spell,
the target is unable to talk or physically interact with the
environment, as she no longer possesses a corporeal from.
This limitation extends to hearing, as well. Unless the recipi-
ent of the spell is contacted through magical, telepathic or
supernatural means, the only form of communication allows
is through gestures.
Hallowed Ground
Skill: Apportation
Arcane Knowledge: Entity
Difficulty: 14
Effect: 10
Range: 1 meter (+0)
Speed: Instantaneous (+0)
Duration: 1 hour (+18)
Casting Time: 1 round (-4)
Other Aspects:
Area Effect (+10): 5-meter radius
Components (-5): Tooth of an undead being (very rare)
Gestures (-2): Turn a complete circle with tooth extended in hand (fairly simple)
This ritual prohibits entry of undead within the Area Effect
prescribed. They may amble about, circling the protected
ground, but they are unable to pass across the faint white
barrier the magic user erects. While all those within the spell’s
zone of safety can cast spells and fire missiles at any nearby
undead without voiding the spells, non-living creatures
outside the area are unable to do the same.
((( insert illo s3-4 hallowed ground)))
Monstrous Creation
Skill: Alteration
Arcane Knowledge: Entity
Difficulty: 33
Effect: 36
Range: 100 meters (+10)
Speed: Instantaneous (+10)
Duration: 3 rounds (+15)
Casting Time: 1 round (-4)
Other Aspects:
Components (-4): Victim who has consumed a Conqueror Worm (rare)
Focused (+10): On target
Gestures (-1): Point at target (simple)
Incantations (-2): “There is something dangerous in you, that wisdom should fear!” (sentence)
Other Conditions (-5): This spell requires that the target consume a worm transformed by the spell Conqueror Worm.
Only if this preparation has been performed, then is it pos-
sible for the spell to function properly. (elaborate)
With the gesture and the utterance of the commanding phrase,
the Conqueror Worm begins to consume its host at an alarm-
ing rate. In 3 rounds, a human size body can be consumed
and transformed into a wretched creature that resembles
the host only in gross form. As this process kills the host,
it is a painful process, usually resulting in the writhing and
screaming of the victim. If the character is killed before the
transformation is complete, the spell is halted.
If the process is completed, then the abomination that
exists is a fleshless, clawed creature (+2D+1 damage) that
follows the magic user’s every command. Its basic attributes
are identical to those of its host, but it can only use its claws to
attack — it is mindless. However, its Body Points are replaced
with a roll of 6D (or it starts with no wounds). Once the foul
monstrosity dies, it cannot be brought back to life without
repeated the entire process. As a result, magic users often
have a few Conqueror Worms nestled inside companions,
just for emergencies.
Mortal Blast *
Skill: Alteration
Arcane Knowledge: Entity
Difficulty: 13
Effect: 18 (6D)
Range: 10 meters (+5)
Speed: Instantaneous (+5)
Duration: 1 second (+0)
Casting Time: 2.5 seconds (+2)
Other Aspects:
Components (-4): Crushed pearl and bone dust (rare)
Feedback (-3): -3 to damage resistance total
Focused (+3): On target
Gestures (-1): Point at target (simple)
A sudden burst of white energy streaks from the caster’s finger
toward the undead target, resulting is a brilliant flash of light.
Upon contact the ball of energy radiates outward, extending
toward the earth and any other nearby objects, discharging
the negative energy that maintains the un-life of the living
dead target. All undead, not demons or other types of extra-
dimensional creatures, suffer 6D damage from the attack. As
casting this spell requires the magic user to use her own life
force, she receives a -3 to her damage resistance total.
Necromantic Sigil
Skill: Alteration
Arcane Knowledge: Magic
Difficulty: 13
Effect: 23 (+5D to alteration skill)
Range: Touch (+0)
Speed: Instantaneous (+0)
Duration: 5 minutes (+10)
Casting Time: 1 round (-4)
Other Aspects:
Concentration (-7): 1 round of meditation; willpower/mettle roll at 13
Focused (+6): On target
Gestures (-1): Mark necromantic sigil in air before target (simple)
Incantations (-2): “Be protected from the magic of Death.” (sentence)
Any target bearing this necromantic sigil is protected
against all magic of necromancy. Unlike countermagic or a
Ward, this spell is in operation once successfully cast and
has a duration. From that point, any other Necromancy spells
must have a skill total equal to or greater than the target’s
roll with the bonus modifier gained from this spell. If the
attacking spell total is lower, then it is negated. This defense
continues until the duration of the spell is satisfied.
Necrosis
Skill: Alteration
Arcane Knowledge: Death
Difficulty: 14
Effect: 9 (3D)
Range: Touch (+0)
Speed: Instantaneous (+0)
Duration: 24 hours (+18)
Casting Time: 1 round (-4)
Other Aspects:
Focused (+5): On target
Incantations (-1): “Death” (phrase)
With a simple touch, the caster can cause 3D damage to a
target. The target’s passive defense is used if the attack is
unsuspected. If it is anticipated, normal combat rules are
used.
By becoming a pathway for negative life energy, the magic
user is able to send negative life energy into the victim. The
touched area first becomes pale, as though drained of blood,
then it turns blue, eventually becoming black as though
gangrenous. The effect isn’t permanent; it heals naturally.
Additionally, the caster gains no bonuses from using the
spell. It is an offensive magic known by many who study the
school of Necromancy.
Passing of Years
Skill: Conjuration
Arcane Knowledge: Death
Difficulty: 42
Effect: 114 (Age 3 years)
Range: 5 meters (+4)
Speed: Instantaneous (+4)
Duration: 1.5 seconds (+1)
Casting Time: 3 rounds (-6)
Other Aspects:
Components (-14): 1 gram of dust from the remains of a living being that has decayed naturally (extremely rare)
Concentration (-3): Requires 2 rounds of concentration; willpower/mettle roll of 9.
Gestures (-3): Sifting the dust between fingers (com - plex)
Incantations (-7): Repeated litany of archaic language learned with the spell; requires artist difficulty 19. Loudly (sentence)
Other Conditions (-1): Only works on living targets
When casting this wretched spell, the mage is able to drain
away the life of a target. The spell requires the caster to obtain
the naturally decayed remains of a once living creature. Then,
while uttering the incantation, 1 gram of dust is ground
between the fingers, letting it fall freely. As this happens, a
black sphere is formed before the mage. This process takes 2
rounds. On the third round, the sphere can be grasped by the
one who cast the spell, and thrown at the target. A successful
marksmanship/firearms or apportation roll is required. If suc-
cessful, then 3 years of life is drained from the victim’s body.
The living energy is not transferred to the mage, it is merely
siphoned away, aging the hapless enemy of the caster. With
each casting the dust that forms the deadly black sphere is
consumed in the process.
Plague Wind
Skill: Conjuration*
Arcane Knowledge: Air
Difficulty: 38
Effect: 9 (3D in damage from inhaling)
Range: 100 meters (+10)
Speed: Instantaneous (+10)
Duration: 3 rounds (+7)
Casting Time: 2 rounds (-6)
Other Aspects:
Area Effect (+50): 10-meter sphere
Components (-4): Ash from a human corpse (rare)
Gestures (-2): Blow ash from hand (complex)
Incantations (-2): “Let dire winds blow.” (sentence)
Variable Movement (+1): Movement of 5 meters per round
A skilled caster can send this poisonous breeze directly toward
an enemy. For those who are not otherwise engaged, it is
possible to see a gray pall of dust moving in the direction
the caster desires. If seen, and far enough away, an attempt
to dodge the dangerous pall can be made. All who inhale its
fetid air suffer 3D damage.
Possess the Unliving
Skill: Conjuration
Arcane Knowledge: Death, enchanted
Difficulty: 30
Effect: 30 (Possession: Full (R1))
Range: 100 meters (+10)
Speed: Instantaneous (+10)
Duration: 1 day (+25)
Casting Time: 1 hour (-18)
Other Aspects:
Components (-6): Personal possession or a part of the body of target (uncommon); charcoal (very common)
Focused (+11): Mage’s mind stays with target
Gestures (-3): Draw circles and sigils of possession  (complex; artist roll with difficulty of 11)
Incantations (-2): “Enter the husk and become its mind.” (sentence)
Other Conditions (-1): Target must be unburied
By casting this spell, the mage can possess an unliving
corpse. She retains her mental attributes, but she takes on
the physical attributes of that the corpse formerly possessed
(possibly reduced, depending on the freshness of the corpse).
As there is no mind, she gains no knowledge about the corpse,
though she’s in complete control of the body.
Of course there is always a risk if a mage animates an
corpse. Any who see such a thing naturally mistake it for a
zombie and are likely to attack.
Preternaturality
Skill: Alteration
Arcane Knowledge: Enchanted
Difficulty: 20
Effect: 36 (+8D to various non-Extranormal attributes)
Range: Touch (+0)
Speed: Instantaneous (+0)
Duration: 1 minute (+9)
Casting Time: 2 rounds (-5)
Other Aspects:
Components (-4): Fresh blood from a sacrifice (rare)
Focused (+9): On Target
Gestures (-3): Mark each part of the body to be enhanced with blood (complex)
Incantations (-2): “Be anointed with the life’s energy of another.” (sentence)
By using the fresh blood of a similar sacrifice, the target
gains a bonus to each attribute the caster chooses. The
caster must rub the blood on the part of the body to gain
the attribute increase. No single attribute can be increased
by more than +3D.
Putrescence
Skill: Conjuration
Arcane Knowledge: Death
Difficulty: 13
Effect: 12 (4D)
Range: Touch (+0)
Speed: Instantaneous (+0)
Duration: 1 hour (+18)
Casting Time: 1 round (-4)
Other Aspects:
Components (-4): venom from a poisonous creature (rare)
Feedback (-1): -1 to damage resistance total
Focused (+6): On target
Incantations (-2): “Imbue with the foulness of Death” (sentence)
In an instant this spell can transforms liquids or consum -
able solids of any sort into poison that causes 4D damage
each round for the duration of the spell if the victim is not
treated by natural or magical means. The damage commences
immediately after ingesting the altered item. A Difficult
stamina roll is required to naturally overcome the effect. All
that needs to be done is for the caster to touch the drink or
food for it to be tainted. A Perception roll of Very Difficult is
required to detect the toxin through smell or taste.
Regeneration
Skill: Conjuration
Arcane Knowledge: Death
Difficulty: 17
Effect: 18 (medicine/healing of 6D)
Range: Touch (+0)
Speed: Instantaneous (+0)
Duration: 1 hour (+18)
Casting Time: 2 rounds (-5)
Other Aspects:
Components (-4): Fresh blood from the specific creature on which the spell is to be cast (uncommon)
Focused (+7): On target
Gestures (-3): Mark sigil on forehead with blood (comoplex; artist roll with difficulty of 11)
A mage can fend off the approaching death of a hero by suc-
cessfully casting this spell. But with healing comes pain. In
order for the spell to work, fresh blood must be drawn from
the intended target. This requires a medicine/healing roll at
Moderate difficulty. This also causes 1D damage if the roll
was a success. A failure results in 2D damage. A 1 on the Wild
Die can produce catastrophic bleeding if the gamemaster
desires — meddling in dark magics has a price.
Once the blood is extracted and the spell is successfully cast,
then the target regenerates damage automatically at a with a
6D medicine/healing skill level. This requires no action on the
characters part. It occurs once every minute for the duration
of the spell. And its effects are visible noticeable to those take
the time to look for them. Another telltale sign is the bloodly
sigil that must remain in place on the target’s forehead. As
it is magical in nature, sweat or splashed water or rain will
not remove it. However, it can be rubbed away if the target
does so intentionally. Doing this ends the spell.
Sanguineous Attack
Skill: Conjuration
Arcane Knowledge: Death
Difficulty: 18
Effect: 25 (+3D+1 damage, 3D+1 intimidation)
Range: 5 meters (+4)
Speed: Instantaneous (+4)
Duration: 3 rounds (+6)
Casting Time: 1 round (-4)
Other Aspects:
Components (-2): Drop of blood (ordinary)
Focused (+4): On weapon
Gestures (-2): Flick drop of blood toward living target (fairly simple)
By simply pricking her thumb, the caster can cause any
weapon to gain +3D+1 damage. Such items can be swords,
knifes, bullets, clubs, anything physical that makes physical
contact with a living creature. If the spell is cast on an item that
successfully causes damage to a target, the effect manifests
itself as unusually heavy bleeding. Excessive bleeding can be
alarming, often causing panic. Characters suffering a wound
from this spell must also suffer a 3D+1 intimidation roll.
Sense Death
Skill: Divination
Arcane Knowledge: Death
Difficulty: 15
Effect: 14 (3D Perception of Would Level)
Range: 10 meters (+5)
Speed: Instantaneous (+5)
Duration: 1 minute (+9)
Casting Time: 1 round (-4)
Other Aspects:
Components (-1): Bloodied cloth (ordinary)
Focused (+4): On target
Gestures (-1): Close eyes (simple)
Other Condition (-1): Must make a search roll to see the target; all normal modifiers apply.
Casting this spell attunes the magic use with the life force of
the target, providing 3D Perception roll to determine a target’s
Wound Level. There are no other effects imbued, other than
determining the amount of life remaining in a character.
Sense Spirit
Skill: Divination
Arcane Knowledge: Entity
Difficulty: 24
Effect: 24 (8D search when attempting to locate spirits or ghosts)
Range: Self (+0)
Speed: Instantaneous (+0) (+0)
Duration: 1 minute (+9)
Casting Time: 1 minute (-9)
Other Aspects:
Area Effect (+20): 10 meters radius
Focused (+6): On caster
Incantations (-2): Reveal yourself (sentence)
Once this spell is cast, the mage can see all undead spirits
and ghosts within a 10-meter radius. Likewise, the atten -
tion of any such incorporeal being is drawn to the character
who uttered the incantation, as the spell forces the entities
to reveal themselves to the caster, and only the caster. The
search roll is needed as the spirits are being commanded to
reveal themselves.
Unliving Weapon
Skill: Conjuration
Arcane Knowledge: Enchanted
Difficulty: 12
Effect: 11 (+2D+1)
Range: Touch (+0)
Speed: Instantaneous (+0)
Duration: 1 hour (+18)
Casting Time: 1round (-4)
Other Aspects:
Components (-3): Weapon of good quality (common)
Feedback (-1): -1 to damage resistance total
Focused (+5): On weapon
Gestures (-2): Run fingers across weapon (simple)
A weapon upon which this spell is cast is imbued with a nega-
tive field of energy. A deep red hue radiates from the weapon
so long as the spell endures. All attacks against living beings
gain a +2D+1 bonus to the weapon’s normal damage. With
each successful strike, the aura radiating from the weapon
spreads across the opponent’s form as life force is drained
away. No additional damage is conveyed when combating
undead entities.
(((illo s3-5)))
Wake the Dead
Skill: Conjuration
Arcane Knowledge: Death
Difficulty: 27
Effect: 30 (10D Body Points)
Range: 100 meters (+10)
Speed: Instantaneous (+10)
Duration: 1 minute (+9)
Casting Time: 2 rounds (-5)
Other Aspects:
Area Effect (+20): 10-meter radius
Components (-4): Skull (uncommon)
Concentration (-10): 1 round of focused thought upon the dead; willpower/mettle roll at 16
Gestures (-1): Lifting hand upward (simple)
Incantations (-2): “Awaken and walk!” loudly (sentence)
Other Condition (-3): The spell can only be cast in an area where dead exist beneath the earth, such as a graveyard,
battlefield, or some other such place.
By calling upon the arcane knowledge of Death and Necro-
mancy, the mage is able to wake the dead in a 10-meter radius
within 100 meters. Bones form into skeletons, and recently
buried corpse become zombies. The total number of dead is
determined by the rolling of the 10D Body Points dice. Each
creature is awarded 1 Wound Level or 6 Body Points This means
if a total of 24 was roll on the dice, then only 4 undead are
called from the earth. The number is rounded down, making
the maximum always 6 undead. This spell only brings forth
skeletons and zombies, no other type of undead creatures.
They are likely to have the attributes of the average living
creature for the location, as well as possess any clothing or
weapons that might normally be buried with them.
Even though the mage is the one who has summoned
the dead from their repose, there is no kinship felt toward
her. Rather, all undead called from their graves attack any
living creature within the 10-meter radius the spell’s effect,
including the mage and any associates. Returning from death
is unpleasant and instills hatred and jealous of the living.
These awakened creatures show no mercy when disposing
of those who live.
Withering Blast
Skill: Conjuration
Arcane Knowledge: Death
Difficulty: 14
Effect: 18 (3D6 damage)
Range: 10 meters (+5)
Speed: Instantaneous (+5)
Duration: 3.5 seconds (+3)
Casting Time: 1.5 seconds (-1)
Other Aspects:
Gestures (-1): Makes a thrusting motion with hand (simple)
Incantations (-1): “Devour!” loudly (phrase)
By calling upon negative energy of life, the mage is able
to hurl a blast of withering power that consumes the life
of a target. During the round the spell is cast, a successful
marksmanship/firearms or apportation roll is required to hit
the target. Nonmagical armor offers no protection from this
death magic. Any character Mortally Wounded by the spell
loses ages 1 year from the effect. This stolen year, or any
number of years taken by this spell, can only be returned
by magical means.

Somniomancy
-------------

Cleansing Sleep
Skill: Conjuration
Arcane Knowledge: Death, folk
Difficulty: 10
Effect: 27 (medicine/healing of 9D)
Range: Self (+0)
Speed: Instantaneous (+0)
Duration: 10 hours (+23)
Casting Time: 25 minutes (-16)
Other Aspects:
Components (-1): Large amount of water (ordinary)
Gestures (-2): Washing with and drinking water (fairly simple)
Other Conditions (-11): Effect may be used once per hour; spell is broken if caster is awakened during the duration
The mage casts this spell, spending 25 minutes washing
herself thoroughly with water and drinking plenty of fluids,
then she goes to sleep. While she sleeps, her body rids itself
of toxins and diseases. This spell courses through her veins
and organs, destroying harmful bacteria, viruses, and natural
and synthetic toxins, rendering her healthy and fit once again.
Each hour, the caster can attempt to eliminate a single poison
or illness within her body by making a medicine/healing roll
as if she had 9D in the skill. The gamemaster determines the
difficulty to eliminate a specific poison or disease; 15 to 20
is generally a good range.
The caster may apply her result point bonus to the first
medicine/healing roll she makes with this spell.

Concentration Lapse
Cantrip (Advanced)
Skill: Alteration
Arcane Knowledge: Magic
Difficulty: 8
Effect: 5 (difficult to attack target is at -5)
Range: 5 meters (+4)
Speed: Instantaneous (+4)
Duration: 1 round (+4)
Casting Time: 1 second (0)
Other Aspects:
Gestures (-1): Waves hand in a hypnotic pattern (sim - ple)
The mage waves her hand in a sinuous motion or wiggles
her fingers slowly.  The target must make a willpower/mettle
roll with a difficulty of 10. If he fails, his eyelids droop briefly,
and he experiences a momentary lapse of concentration,
of the sort he might have if he were very tired. This lapse
makes him fumble his defenses: He is too slow on the parry
or notices the incoming punch half a second too late; the
difficulty to hit him is decreased by  until the caster’s turn
in the next round.
The caster may apply her result point bonus to the difficulty
of the target’s willpower/mettle roll to avoid the effect.

Detect Slumber
Skill: Divination
Arcane Knowledge: Magic
Difficulty: 12
Effect: 5 (value to determine state of slumber)
Range: Self (+0)
Speed: Instantaneous (+0)
Duration: 1 round (+4)
Casting Time: 1 second (0)
Other Aspects:
Area of Effect (+15): Divination sphere sphere with radius of 10 meters
Other Conditions (-1): Only works on sleeping creatures
The caster’s vision takes on an added quality, providing her
with additional information about certain creatures within
the area of effect. Simply by looking at a creature within
the area of effect, she instantly knows whether or not it is
asleep. If it is not asleep, the caster has no additional means
of discerning if it is resting, about to fall asleep, feigning
sleep, dead, or in any other state; this spell simply reveals
that the creature is sleeping or that it is not. Generally, the
caster can determine the sleeping condition of all the crea -
tures within the area of effect unless they are hidden from
view or there are a great many of them (and thus some are
concealing others).

Dream Travel
Skill: Apportation
Arcane Knowledge: Dreams
Difficulty: 19
Effect: 11 (moves up to 150 kilograms)
Range: 1 kilometer (+15)
Speed: Instantaneous (+15)
Duration:  40 seconds (+8)
Casting Time: 25 seconds (-7)
Other Aspects:
Concentration (-3): 25 seconds with willpower/mettle difficulty of 9
Other Conditions (-2): Pass only between dreamers
The caster uses this spell to transport herself great distances
via the dreams of other creatures. She moves from dream to
dream in the time it takes to blink, seeing strange landscapes
and briefly passing by the hopes and fears of myriad creatures
before arriving at her destination.
When she casts this spell, the caster targets a sleeping
creature within one kilometer; she must see or otherwise
be aware of the sleeper’s location (perhaps by sleep sense, for
instance) and it must be the size of a cat or larger. Over the
course of 30 seconds, her physical form fades into translucence
and disappears entirely as she enters the sleeping creature’s
dreams. During these 30 seconds, the caster  cannot influence
events around her, nor can she move from her position; her
mind and body are becoming part of the creature’s dreams.
Though she enters the sleeping creature’s dreams, the
dreamer does not detect her and she cannot deliver mes -
sages or otherwise influence his dreams, as she could with
step into sleep; she is merely along for the ride, using the
creature’s sleeping consciousness as a vehicle for her unique
brand of magic.
Once at the new host, the caster’s physical form slowly
manifests, fading into translucence and then becoming solid
in the latest dreamer’s presence. As she was when she first
entered the dreams, she is not physically present in the area
until her form solidifies over the course of 30 seconds.
Note that the caster has no knowledge of the surroundings
of her destination dreamer, and she could appear in the midst
of enemies or in an inhospitable environment — though
as people do not usually sleep in these sorts of conditions,
the odds are slim. The caster usually ends up in a bedroom
somewhere and tiptoes out.
Note that though the process of the caster’s physical self
discorporating takes time, the dream travel itself is virtually
instantaneous.

(((illustration s6-1)))

Dream Visions
Skill: Divination
Arcane Knowledge: Dreams
Difficulty: 22
Effect: 12 (search of 4D)
Range: 2.5 kilometers (+17)
Speed: Instantaneous (+17)
Duration: 10 minutes (+14)
Casting Time: 5 hours (-22)
Other Aspects:
Area of Effect (+12): Divination sphere with radius of 5 meters
Components (-4): Photographs or paintings of exotic locales (uncommon)
Concentration (-6): 1 hour with willpower/mettle difficulty of 12
This spell allows the caster to view distant places in her
dreams, though those places are not exactly as they appear
in the real world.
The caster spends one hour in preparation, gazing at the
photographs or paintings and envisioning the place she
would like to see (which does not have to be the place of
the paintings). Then, she goes to sleep. Four hours into her
sleep (which are part of the casting time), her dreams take
on more meaningful forms. She can observe any one area
within 2.5 kilometers as if she were there herself, using a
search skill of 4D. She can view an area with which she is
familiar or she can specify a direction and distance, such
as “southwest, 1.22 kilometers,” and view the area at that
distance. If the specified location is within the ground, a
wall, or other obstruction, she sees nothing but darkness.
Her point of view can appear close to the ground, viewing
it as she would if she were standing there, or it can appear
floating in the air, at ground level, and so on.
The caster does not see the areas exactly as normal, for
she is within the dreamscape. Areas and people within the
dreamscape appear as they do in the real world, but the
lighting is indistinct and gray mists hover at the edges of
vision. Forms are muted and blurred. Most importantly, the
subconscious images that people associate with individuals,
places, and things walk the dreamscape. Though these images
may have no physical existence in the real world, they are the
things people dream about when they visit these areas and
creatures in their sleep. For example, a graveyard dreamscape
may be haunted by ghosts and the cries of the dead, because
these fears lurk in humanity’s subconscious and when people
dream of graveyards, these images often appear. A sports star
in the dreamscape may have trophies, women, and dollar bills
floating around him, as these are the ideas that other people
associate with such a celebrity.
The ancillary images in the dreamscape can serve both
to enhance and obscure the caster’s understanding and are
tools for the gamemaster to use.

Dreams in Hand
Skill: Conjuration
Arcane Knowledge: Dreams
Difficulty: 10
Effect: 0 (creates 1 kilogram of inanimate material)
Range: Self (+0)
Speed: Instantaneous (+0)
Duration: 40 minutes (+17)
Casting Time: 1 hour (-18)
Other Aspects:
Component (-1): A few grains of sand (ordinary)
Concentration (-6): 1 hour with willpower/mettle difficulty of 12
Focused (+3): On sand
Other Alterant (+25): Item can be of any complexity or value, but the greater the complexity or value, the greater the secondary skill roll required
This spell allows the caster to enter her dreams, envision
an item, and return to the waking world with that item in
her possession.
For one hour, the caster meditates on the spell and the
item she wishes to create with her dreams. She can imagine
anything she likes, though complicated or artistic objects
require skill rolls as determined by the gamemaster. (Failure
on the secondary skill roll indicates that some obvious flaw
exists in the item; success has no effect beyond the item’s
satisfactory creation.)
Aftershe awakes from the meditation, the object is in
her hand, a physical reality. It remains substantial for 40
minutes; after this time, it grows translucent before it dis -
appears entirely.
The caster can use this spell to create items of great intrinsic
worth, like currency, precious metals, or jewelry, but they
vanish when the duration expires, which is bound to anger
shopkeepers.
The caster can add her result point bonus to the spell’s
duration value and refigure the measure in seconds.

Dreamtime
Skill: Divination
Arcane Knowledge: Dreams
Difficulty: 43
Effect: 50 (up to 1 year in the past or future — specified at spell casting; search of 4D)
Range: 20 kilometers (+19)
Speed: Instantaneous (+19)
Duration: 25 minutes (+16)
Casting Time: 5 hours (-22)
Other Aspects:
Area of Effect (+12): Divination sphere with radius of 5 meters
Components (-4): A 4-hour hourglass (uncommon)
Concentration (-6): 1 hour with willpower/mettle difficulty of 12
Other Alterant (+2): May select time period viewed
This spell allows the caster to use her dreams to view places
as they appeared in the past or will appear in the future.
The caster spends one hour in preparation, meditating and
focusing, at the end of which she turns the hourglass and
goes to sleep. Four hours later (which are part of the casting
time), as the sand in the hourglass trickles out, the caster’s
dreams take on meaning.
In addition to the ability to view a distant location (up to
20 kilometers away), the caster can also look up to a year
into the past or the future. She makes the decision as to the
area and the time when she casts the spell. (For example,
“The playground at Washington Heights Elementary School,
January 2, 3:31 p.m.”)
If the caster looks into the past, she sees the area as it
appeared back then. The dreamscape images, however, are
those that modern-day people feel for the area. For example,
if a terrible murder was committed in a certain house last
week, and the caster observes the house as it was one month
ago, before the murder, the dreamscape still shows her shad-
owy images of death and fear, for that is what people in the
current time associate with the house.
If the caster looks into the future, she sees the area as it is
most likely to appear. The future is uncertain and many factors
can change it, but she sees the area as it will most probably
appear — assuming that no one does anything significant
to alter it. Like looking into the past, the dreamscape reveals
images that modern-day people associate with the area. For
example, the caster may view a coastline as it will appear five
months from now and see the remains of a terrorist attack
— broken piers, dead bodies, ravaged beaches. Even though
five months from now people will associate the coastline with
horror and violence, currently they see it as a simple beach,
and the dreamscape images are people in swimsuits, beach
balls, and the like (and maybe the odd shark, as a nod to the
neurotic mothers of the world).

Groggy
Skill: Alteration
Arcane Knowledge: Magic
Difficulty: 22
Effect: 24 (-1D to two mental and two physical attributes)
Range: 10 meters (+5)
Speed: Instantaneous (+5)
Duration: 1 minute (+9)
Casting Time: 1.5 seconds (-1)
Other Aspects:
Gestures (-1): The caster yawns widely (simple)
The caster yawns hugely and, as all know, yawning is
contagious. The target follows suit. This spell magnifies the
target’s feeling of sleepiness, making him momentarily groggy
and unable to think straight, as if badly in need of rest. His
reflexes are slowed, his hand-eye coordination decreased,
and his mind easily distracted. He suffers a -1D penalty on
two mental and two physical attributes (such as Reflexes,
Knowledge, Co ordination, and Perception in D6 Adventure )
for 12 rounds.

Insomnia
Skill: Conjuration
Arcane Knowledge: Magic
Difficulty: 11
Effect: 9 (Achilles’ Heel (R3), insomnia — -1 pip to all mental and physical attributes, increasing by -1 pip for each sleepless night)
Range: 5 meters (+4)
Speed: Instantaneous (+4)
Duration: 1 week (+29)
Casting Time: 1 day (-25)
Other Aspects:
Charges (+5): 1 improved charge
Components (-8): A miniature sheep doll (common); 6 pins silver pins (common, destroyed)
Focused (+7): On target
Gestures (-2): The caster pushes a pin through the sheep doll's head and pushes an additional pin into the doll after every 24 hours (fairly simple)
Incantations (-1): “Sleep no more.” (phrase)
This spell makes it challenging for the target to sleep. His
sleeplessness is maddening and dulls his mind and body.
Each night following the end of the casting time, the target
must make a willpower/mettle roll versus a roll of the caster’s
willpower/mettle or be stricken with insomnia. He is unable
to sleep for one full night. In addition to being frustrating,
the next morning, the victim is mentally drained and physi-
cally fatigued. He suffers -1 pip to all mental and physical
attributes. This reduction accumulates for each night the
character cannot get sleep (by failing to make the roll). Nap-
ping during the day provides no relief.
No attribute can drop below 1D because of this spell.
The caster can add her result point bonus to the difficulty of
the willpower/mettle checks needed to shake off the spell.

(((illo s6-2)))

(((Begin Sidebar — place sidebar anywhere in somniomancy section)))
Little Jackie’s Bedtime Stories
Description/History: Little Jackie’s Bedtime Stories
is a children’s book — on the surface. A fanciful color
painting on the front page depicts a boy (Little Jackie,
presumably) sleeping in a bed, moonlight spilling across
him, as a kindly woman watches him from a nearby
stool with a book resting closed on her lap. The nar -
rative explains that Little Jackie is afraid of “ghosts
and ghoulies that come in the night,” and his mother
reads him a selection of bedtime stories that lull him
to sleep and argue against the existence of ghosts and
ghoulies. The bulk of the work consists of the stories
she tells him. They are written as rhyming poems and
accompanied by beautiful illustrations.
Yet the poems and pictures are more than they
seem.
If one looks closely at the illustrations in the book,
one may find a shadow or pair of glinting eyes where
none should be — hiding in the corner, or outside a
window, or peeking from a closet. Also, the careful
reader is left with a feeling of unease. Though the
poems are superficially lighthearted and explain that
monsters don’t exist, each poem has a line or stanza
or hidden meaning that seems to disprove the fact,
making the entire book an irony.
The stories also hide spells within them. They are
secreted in words, pictures, phrases, and deciphering
them is no easy task.
The book itself was, according to the date on the
cover, printed in 1756 in Belgium. It’s covered in
leather and its 48 pages are wrinkled and yellow. Still,
the glue seems to be holding, and most of the books
are in excellent condition. The inside front cover
states that the book had a limited print run: only one
hundred were ever produced. Each book also includes
a collector’s number, which tells which number out of
the hundred it is. The author is listed as Johan Kaplan,
though history records no one by this name who might
have written the book.
Contents: Though discovering them is difficult,
Little Jackie’s Bedtime St ories includes the following
spells: dream travel, insomnia, kiss of the sandman,
night terrors, nightmare, sleep eternal, sleep sense, and
step into sleep.
Protections: The book’s primary protection is its
code.
Language: Dutch.
Reading Period/Difficulty: Reading the book isn’t
hard (a languages/reading/writing check with a difficulty
of 7 accomplishes it), and takes 30 minutes.
Deciphering the hidden spells is harder. Each is
spread across multiple pages and included in text and
pictures. Each spell requires a scholar check with a
difficulty of 16. Characters with the dream, magic, or
equivalent Arcane Knowledge gain its bonus on this
check. Attempting to decipher a spell (successful or
not) takes five hours.
(((End Sidebar)))

Kiss of the Sandman
Skill: Conjuration
Arcane Knowledge: Magic
Difficulty: 21
Effect: 15 (difficulty for target to resist falling asleep)
Range: 2.5 meters (+2)
Speed: Instantaneous (+2)
Duration: 5 minutes (+13)
Casting Time: 3.5 seconds (-3)
Other Aspects:
Area of Effect (+10): Cone with height and base radius of 3 meters
Components (-2): Sand (ordinary, destroyed)
Focused (+5): On targets
Gestures (-1): Grab a handful of sand and blow it at the targets (simple)
This spell drives the targets into a magic sleep. The caster
scoops up a handful of sand and blows upon it, whereupon it
billows out to create a cone with a tip that begins 2.5 meters
from the caster. The cone is three meters long and six meters
wide at its end. The first target hit by the spell must make
willpower/mettle roll with a difficulty of 15 or fall asleep. Those
up to one meter behind the first target have difficulty of 14,
those between one and two meters have a difficulty of 13,
and those between two and three meters have a difficulty of
12.  Creatures in combat or some other high-energy situation
receive a +4 bonus on their willpower/mettle rolls.
Sleeping creatures remain magically asleep and do not
awaken normally, though other beings can shake them,
slap them, dump water on their heads, and perform other
actions in attempts wake them; doing so allows the sleeping
creature another chance to awake, again with a willpower/
mettle roll at the same difficulty that put him to sleep. (The
gamemaster may allow bonuses on this roll depending on
the vigor with which the characters attempt to awaken the
victim.) The awakening attempt may be tried once per round
at most; if one type of action fails, those trying to rose the
sleeper must find another way.
After the spell’s duration expires, the sleeping creatures
enter normal sleep and awaken normally (from loud noises,
being physically jostled, and so on).
The caster can add her result point bonus to the difficulty
of the willpower/mettle rolls to avoid the spell when other
people attempt to awaken the victims.
Somniomancers often use this spell as a precursor to other
spells, such as dream travel, step into sleep, or nightmare.

Night Terrors
Skill: Conjuration
Arcane Knowledge: Dreams, folk
Difficulty: 30
Effect: 41 (difficulty of 18 to resist falling asleep; 5D physical damage, ignores nonmagical armor)
Range: 60 meters (+9)
Speed: Instantaneous (+9)
Duration: 1  minute/12 rounds (+9)
Casting Time: 1 round (-4)
Other Aspects:
Components (-10): Amber dust (very rare, destroyed)
Multiple Targets (+15): Up to 5 targets
This spell puts up to five targets to sleep and then ravages
their minds with lethal nightmares. The targets must each
make a willpower/mettle roll with a difficulty of 18 or fall
asleep. This spell then burrows into the sleepers’ subconscious,
drawing forth their greatest fears and forming them into
horrific nightmares. They toss and thrash violently, obviously
distressed and taking 5D of damage per round until dead or
the duration ends. See kiss of the Sandman  for restrictions
on waking magically slumbering creatures.
The caster may add her result point bonus to the difficulty
of the willpower/mettle rolls to resist falling asleep or to the
damage done each round (not both and chosen once for the
spell).

Night Visitation
Skill: Alteration
Arcane Knowledge: Dreams
Difficulty: 23
Effect: 12 (persuasion of 4D)
Range: 2.5 kilometers (+17)
Speed: Instantaneous (+17)
Duration: 1 minute (+9)
Casting Time: 1 minute (-9)
Other Aspects:
Other Conditions (-1): Touch or name single specific target, who must be asleep
This spell allows the caster to deliver messages to sleep -
ing creatures. The caster names a specific individual and
formulates an image or series of images, which can be up to
a minute in length, that appears in the named individual’s
dream. If the individual is not asleep, the spell fails. The
images can be anything the caster imagines that’s relatively
nonfrightening; the caster cannot give the target a nightmare,
though she may deliver threats and ultimatums. The caster
can use this dream to persuade the target as if she had 4D
in the persuasion skill.
The caster chooses whether or not the target remembers
the dream when he awakes. If the target does not remember
the dream, the dream may still influence him subconsciously,
at the gamemaster’s discretion.
In lieu of naming a specific individual, the caster may
make physical contact with the target (in which case, the
range is irrelevant).
Nightmare
Skill: Alteration
Arcane Knowledge: Dreams
Difficulty: 32
Effect: 60 (10D physical damage, ignores all armor)
Range: Touch (+0)
Speed: Instantaneous (+0)
Duration: 1 round (+4)
Casting Time: 1 second (-0)
Other Aspects:
Other Conditions (-1): Target must be asleep
The caster touches the creature and  uses this spell to dredge
up his most feared images from his subconscious, using these
to create a horrific nightmare. The target thrashes, moans,
and sweats. He must make a willpower/mettle roll against a
roll of the caster’s willpower/mettle; if he fails, he dies of fear
(and cardiac arrest).
If the target is not asleep, this spell fails.
The caster can apply her result point bonus to the dif -
ficulty of the willpower/mettle roll the target needs to avoid
the effect.
(((illo s6-3)))
Nightshield
Skill: Conjuration
Arcane Knowledge: Magic
Difficulty: 15
Effect: 30 (compare to spell total of spell attempting to influence caster)
Range: Self (+0)
Speed: Instantaneous (+0)
Duration: 10 hours (+23)
Casting Time: 1.5 hours (-19)
Other Aspects:
Components (-4): A small shield of beaten silver (rare)
Other Conditions (-1): Awakening disrupts the spell
The mage places a small silver shield on her chest just
before she retires for the night, casting a spell that protects
her dreams from outside influence (such as the machinations
of another somniomancer). She adds her result point bonus
to the spell’s effect value. If a another mage casts a spell that
attempts to access her dreams or detecting whether she’s
sleeping, the second caster’s  skill roll  for that spell must
equal or exceed nightshield’s value (30 plus the caster’s result
point bonus) to affect her.
Example: Shannon casts nightshield before she goes to
sleep because she suspects her somniomantic rival, Bruce,
is on the prowl. She makes a conjuration roll to cast the spell
and rolls a total of 19. This roll generates a result point bonus
of 2, which she adds to nightshield’s effect value of 30, for a
total of 32. If Bruce shows up and attempts to cast nightmare
on Shannon, his alteration roll must equal or exceed 32 to
affect her.
Put the “Rest” in “Restoration”
Skill: Conjuration
Arcane Knowledge: Time, folk
Difficulty: 15
Effect: 27 (medicine/healing of 9D)
Range: Self (+0)
Speed: Instantaneous (+0)
Duration: 10 hours (+23)
Casting Time: 1 minute (-9)
Other Aspects:
Other Conditions (-11): Effect may be used once per hour; spell is broken if caster is awakened during the duration
The mage casts this spell immediately before going to
sleep. While she sleeps, her wounds heal at an accelerated
rate. Each hour, she can heal her physical wounds as if she
had 9D in the medicine/healing skill.
Really Comfy Pillow
Skill: Conjuration
Arcane Knowledge: magic
Difficulty: 16
Effect: 12 (Accelerated Healing (R1), +1D bonus to natural healing attempts, and Arcane Knowledge: Dreams (R1)), +2 to casting of related Magic spells)
Range: Touch (+0)
Speed: Instantaneous (+0)
Duration: 10 hours (+23)
Casting Time: 10 minutes (-14)
Other Aspects:
Charges (+15): 3 improved charges
Components (-3): A really comfortable pillow (uncommon)
Other Conditions (-2): Target must want to fall asleep; spell is broken if target is awakened during duration
The caster touches a pillow, imbuing it with an enchantment
that functions up to three times. Whenever a creature rests
on the pillow, whether intending to sleep or merely take a
short rest, over the course of one minute, the spell puts the
creature to sleep. The user sleeps deeply and well, untroubled
by nightmares or anxieties, for 10 hours and awakens feeling
refreshed and invigorated, providing a +1D bonus to natu -
ral healing attempts. This sleep is not magical, as it is with
kiss of the Sandman or night terrors; it’s simply a dreamless,
refreshing sleep. Loud noises, physical movement, and the
like awaken the sleeper normally.
The pillow can also aid in the casting of somniomancy
spells that involve the mage being asleep in order to work.
Using a really comfy pillow  grants the caster a +2 bonus on
her appropriate Magic skill checks when she casts spells that
require her to meditate or sleep.
(((illo s6-4)))
Sleep Eternal
Skill: Alteration
Arcane Knowledge: Dreams
Difficulty: 41
Effect: 20 (difficulty to resist falling asleep)
Range: 10 meters (+5)
Speed: Instantaneous (+5)
Duration: 10 years (+43)
Casting Time: 1 minute (-9)
Other Aspects:
Focused (+12): On target
Variable Duration (+4): Off only
Other Alterant (+1): Puts target in type of sleep the caster chooses
This spell causes the target to enter an endless sleep, effec-
tively killing him — or at least, killing him until the caster
chooses to release the curse.
The target, which must already be asleep, falls even deeper
into his sleep, so deep that he never awakens. When the caster
casts this spell, the target can make a willpower/mettle roll
with a difficulty of 20 to resist its effects; if he succeeds, he
awakens. If this roll fails, he doesn’t wake up for 10 years.
However, friends may attempt to bestir him; see kiss of the
Sandman for details on reviving a magically slumbering
character. The sleeper must have his nutrition intravenously
injected if he is to survive.
The caster can choose the nature of the target’s sleep. She
has three options:
•  The target’s sleep is full of pleasant dreams. He sleeps
gently, with a smile upon his lips.
•  The target’s sleep is dreamless. He appears to be in a
coma.
•  The target’s sleep is uneasy, filled with vague nightmares.
He moans and twitches, obviously distressed.
The caster can end this spell at any time. The only other
way to awaken the target is to design a spell with the express
purpose of doing so.
The caster may add her result point bonus to the difficulty
of the target’s willpower/mettle rolls to resist the spell’s
effects.
Sleep of Champions
Skill: Alteration
Arcane Knowledge: Magic
Difficulty: 25
Effect: 36 (+1D to all mental and physical attributes)
Range: Self (+0)
Speed: Instantaneous (+0)
Duration: 15 hours (+24)
Casting Time: 10 hours (-23)
Other Aspects:
Focused (+12): On caster
The caster spends two hours in preparation, then goes
to sleep. When she awakens, she feels refreshed. Her mind
is keen, her muscles flushed with energy, and her reflexes
at their peak. She receives a +1D bonus on all mental and
physical attributes for the next 15 hours.
Sleep Sense
Skill: Divination
Arcane Knowledge: Magic
Difficulty: 28
Effect: 24 (search of 8D to locate sleeping creatures)
Range: Self (+0)
Speed: Instantaneous (+0)
Duration: 15 hours (+24)
Casting Time: 15 minutes (-15)
Other Aspects:
Area of Effect (+21): Divination sphere with radius of 25 meters
Components (-10): Small letter Zs made of gold (very rare, destroyed)
Focused (+9): On caster
Gestures (-1): Toss the Zs into the air (simple)
Incantations (-2): “I see you when you’re sleeping.” (complete sentence)
Variable Movement (+5): Bending/unseen target
This spell allows the caster to detect sleeping creatures
without actively attempting to do so.
Over a 15-minute period, the caster tosses some small gold
Zs into the air while repeating the incantation. For the spell’s
duration, the caster always knows the exact locations of all
sleeping creatures within the area of effect that are the size
of a cat or larger. Walls and other obstructions do not inhibit
this spell, though sleep sense does not convey the knowledge
of how to access the sleepers, merely their locations.
Most somniomancers cast this spell at the beginning of
the day because it helps them find targets for some of their
other spells, like step into sleep, nightmare, and dream travel.
Sleeping Puppet
Skill: Alteration
Arcane Knowledge: Dreams
Difficulty: 15
Effect: 24 (Possession: Limited (R1))
Range: Self (+0)
Speed: Instantaneous (+0)
Duration: 1 hour (+18)
Casting Time: 1 minute (-9)
Other Aspects:
Focused (+8): On caster
Other Conditions (-2): Target must be sleeping; target must be sentient
It is possible for the caster to enter into the dimension
of dreams and gain control over another sleep character’s
mind. The target must be capable of cognitive thought and
be of similar mind to the caster.
If the spell is successfully cast, then the magic user gets the
Possession: Limited (R1) Special Ability and must convince
or command the target to obey The sleeping target cannot
use willpower/mettle, as she is unaware that her mind is being
influenced; rather, she can use Presence. If the caster succeeds,
then the sleeper obeys, providing the command does not go
against the personal morals of the target. Walking, talking
and all normal actions can be executed so long as the mage is
successful. If a failure occurs, the target awakens from what
is thought to be a dream or nightmare — possibly far from
where she fell asleep.
Step Into Sleep
Skill: Alteration
Arcane Knowledge: Dreams
Difficulty: 15
Effect: 39 (Possessioin: Limited (R1) and investigation of 5D)
Range: Touch (+0)
Speed: Instantaneous (+0)
Duration: 10 minutes (+14)
Casting Time: 1 minute (-9)
Other Aspects:
Timeslip
Skill: Chronomancy
Arcane Knowledge: Dimension, Entity
Difficulty: 22
Effect: 13 (timeslip up to 400 kilograms, caster’s weight plus their alternate self’s weight)
Range: 150 meters (+11)
Speed: instantaneous (+1)1
Duration: 1.5 rounds (+1)
Casting Time: 1 second (-0)
Other Aspects:
Components (-8): An ounce of quicksilver (uncommon, destroyed)
Continence (-1): Caster sweats profusely and foams at the mouth (noticeable)
Gestures (-3): The mage points off into the distance and then pulls the visualized target toward them as she leaps forward. (complex, action difficulty 11)
Incantations (-2): “See ya, wouldn’t want to be ya!” (sentence)
In desperate situations, some people are forced into
taking drastic actions to save their own skin. By invoking
the power of the timeslip, the caster changes place with a
counterpart from an alternate reality who returns to their
proper time when their spell runs its course. When the
hijacked future relative returns, the caster may choose to
reappear anywhere up to 150 meters from her previous loca-
tion. The destination spot must be visible to the caster or at
the very least known to them (inner sanctum, the home of
a close friend etc.) when the timeslip is cast. Of course, the
Components (-4): An item important to the target (uncommon)
Incantations (-1): “Open your dream to me.” (phrase)
Other Conditions (-1): Target must be asleep
This spell allows the caster to become part of the target’s
dream, delivering messages, showing her power, and perform-
ing many other actions that lesser spells do not allow.
If the target is not asleep, the spell fails. If he is asleep,  the
caster enters the target’s dream. While in the target’s dreams,
the caster’s body is rigid and vulnerable, similar to a character
using the Possession: Limited Special Ability.
While within the dream, the caster can speak, cast spells,
use skills, and so on, but she cannot affect her surroundings in
any way. The sleeper continues to dream, and his subconscious
incorporates the caster into his dreams. The caster cannot
directly harm the target, but she can deliver messages, disrupt
his dreams, and so on. Similarly, the target’s dreams pose no
danger to the caster, though they may be frightening.
Additionally, the mage can observe the dreams, which
might tell the caster something about the target. Using
the “Posession Knowledge” chart and the investigation skill
granted by the spell, the somniomancer can gain informa -
tion about the target, although it may be couched in dream
terms.
The caster can add her result point bonus to the investiga-
tion total.
True Rest
Skill: Alteration
Arcane Knowledge: Magic, folk
Difficulty: 13
Effect: 18 (Accelerated Healing (R2), +2D to natural heal - ing rolls)
Range: Touch (+0)
Speed: Instantaneous (+0)
Duration: 10 hours (+23)
Casting Time: 10 minutes (-14)
Other Aspects:
Other Conditions (-2): Target must be sleeping; awakening target during the duration disrupts the spell
The target, which must be willing and about to go to sleep,
enters a particularly restful slumber that enhances his natu-
ral healing process. When the target makes natural healing
roll, he gets +2D on the roll. If the target needs seveal days
of rest before attempting the natural healing roll, the spell
should be cast on the last day of rest, as the effect lasts only
10 hours.
(((Begin Sidebar may be placed anywhere in som -
niomancy section)))

Somniomancy Tome

Description/History: The tome has never had a
title; scholars who know of its existence refer to it as
The Elven Book of Dreams.
Long ago, an unknown elven mage experimented
with somniomancy for the first time in her culture.
She was fascinated with the meaning behind dreams
and the ways magic might alter and divine them, and
her curiosity developed into somniomancy. She kept
a notebook of her reasoning, thoughts, theories, and,
most importantly, spells. When she died, the book
came into her apprentice’s hands, who added his own
musings and the spells he discovered. The Elven Book
of Dreams passed in this way through a dozen genera-
tions of elven somniomancers and has become a vast
and valuable receptacle of somniomantic lore. The
tome is currently in the possession of the elven wizard
Rallius Windslip, but as somniomancy is not his field
he does not add to the book’s pages. He allows visiting
abducted visitor not think very highly of being so rudely
abducted and could possibly have the power to revisit their
alternate self in order to avenge themselves. The payback
could be brutally painful.
scholars and mages to peruse the book, but he does
not let them borrow it; he is waiting, he says, for the
next elven somniomancer who is truly worthy to add
to the book’s knowledge.
Contents: The Elven Book of Dreams includes the
following spells: dream travel, dream visions, dreams in
hand, dreamtime, night terrors, nightmare, sleep eternal,
and true rest.
In addition, the book contains generations of writing and
musing about the nature of dreams and of somniomancy.
A character who spends 80 hours (total) reading the book
gains one rank in Arcane Knowledge: Dreams. When she
has the book on hand to use as reference, she gains an addi-
tional temporary rank. (The book is a good in-game excuse
to improve or gain Arcane Knowledge: Dreams.)
Protections: The book’s authors did not place
any protections upon it, but Rallius Windslip has. A
character who opens the book without his permission
is subject to a Bad Luck Curse (see the D6 Adventure
Rulebook, page 100).
Language: Elvish.
Reading Period/Difficulty: The Elven Book of
Dreams was written over many elven generations, and
during that time the elvish language evolved. Only a
true student of the language can manage to puzzle
through the book’s various dialects; doing so requires a
language: elvish check with a difficulty of 23. Succeeding
on this check and spending 80 hours studying the book
provides the reader with the benefits listed above.
Deciphering an individual spell is easier. Doing so
takes 30 minutes and a languages/reading/writing:
elvish check, the difficulty of which depends on the
spell. Those added to the book early in its history are
written in older dialects and thus are more difficult to
decipher. The difficulties are as follows:
•  19: dream visions, dreams in hand, sleep eternal,
true rest
•  15: dreamtime, nightmare
•  11: dream travel, night terrors
(((End Sidebar)))
Waking Nightmare
Skill: Conjuration
Arcane Knowledge: Dreams
Difficulty: 22
Effect: 24 (Fear (R12), +12 to initimidation totals and -12 to combat difficulties against those affected by the fear)
Range: 5 meters (+4)
Speed: Instantaneous (+4)
Duration: 1 minute (+9)
Casting Time: 2 rounds (-5)
Other Aspects:
Area Effect (+10): Circle with radius of 5 meters
Concentration (-2): 2 rounds with willpower/mettle difficulty of 8
Focused (+6): On target (nightmare only)
Unreal Effect (-7): Disbelief difficulty of 13
A knowledgeable mage can send her mind into the plane of
dreams and conjure a waking nightmare that can terrifying
anyone who believes it. If the spell’s conditions are satisfied,
and it is successfully cast, the mage inspires fear in a solitary
target or a group of creatures that occupy the radius of the
spell. This fear manifests itself as a walking nightmore to
those within the spell’s radius . The dread sight always stays
within the spell’s proximity of those affected by the spell
— though, if there’s a reason for them to do so, each target
may attempt to disbelieve the manifestation (instead of the
resistance difficulty listed with the Special Ability).
Walking Dream
Skill: Conjuration
Arcane Knowledge: Dreams
Difficulty: 12
Effect: 34 (Psionics: astral projection of 5D+2)
Range: Self (+0)
Speed: Instantaneous (+0)
Duration: 1 hour (+18)
Casting Time: 5 hours (-22)
Other Aspects:
Concentration (-6): 1 hour with willpower/mettle difficulty of 12
This spell allows the caster’s dreaming consciousness to
leave her body, roaming the world while she sleeps. The caster
spends one hour in preparation, meditating and otherwise
preparing her mind for its journey, then goes to sleep. Four
hours into her sleep (which counts as part of the casting
time), her dreaming consciousness leaves her body for one
hour, traveling as if the caster has 5D+2 in the Psionics: astral
projection skill.
(((illo s6-5)))

Vitomancy
---------

Animal Loyalty
Skill: Alteration
Arcane Knowledge: Animal
Difficulty: 20
Effect: 18 (+2D to caster’s animal handling  or persuasion: animals [D6 Space only]; +2D to target’s willpower/mettle)
Range: Self or touch (+0)
Speed: Instantaneous (+0)
Duration: 1 day (+25)
Casting Time: 2 rounds (-5)
Other Aspects:
Focused (+8): On caster and target
Gestures (-2): Gently stroke the target animal (fairly simple)
Incantations (-1): Make soothing sounds (phrase)
Other Conditions (-2): Limited to animals that are friendly to the caster; target and caster must remain within 10 meters of each other to get bonuses
To inspire unnatural loyalty in a pet, animal companion,
or mount, the caster simply strokes the creature and makes
reassuring, soothing sounds. For a full day thereafter, the
animal will be especially loyal to the caster, which translates
into an animal handling  (or persuasion: animals in D6 Space)
bonus of +2D for the caster toward the target creature. In
addition, because the animal is so trusting of the caster,
whenever it’s within 10 meters of the caster, it gains a will-
power/mettle bonus of +2D to resist attempts, magical or
otherwise, by others to alter its behavior.
Animal Savior
Skill: Alteration
Arcane Knowledge: Animal
Difficulty: 16
Effect: 18 (+2D to lifting/lift to recover fallen comrades; +2D to willpower/mettle  to resist attempts to dissuade recovery)
Range: 1 meter (+0)
Speed: Instantaneous (+0)
Duration: 1 hour (+18)
Casting Time: 1 round (-4)
Other Aspects:
Components (-4): Something from the type of animal targeted (very common); something from the individual to be protected by the target animal (very common)
Focused (+7): On target
Gestures (-2): Draw a line on the ground (fairly simple)
Other Conditions (-1): Limited to animals
To cast this spell, the mage places on the ground something
from that type of animal to be targeted (strands of dog’s fur
or locks of horse’s hair, for example) and something from the
individual the animal is intended to watch over. She then
draws a line from these items toward the animal, and then
toward the individual to be protected.
For a period of one hour, the targeted animal keeps a watch-
ful eye over its ward. Should  the ward ever fall (rendered
unconscious, incapacitated, paralyzed, dead, or otherwise
unmoving), the animal will quickly descend upon the body
and pull it to a location out of harm’s way. This spell grants
the animal a +2D lifting/lift bonus for this purpose, allowing
even a small dog the ability to pull a human to safety, and
a +2D willpower/mettle bonus to resist efforts to dissuade
intervention.
While there is no range limitation on how far the animal
will theoretically pull the character, the location to which
the immobilized character is moved is always the nearest
“safe” place. This might mean dragging the body out of a
room, behind a tree, into a defile, or any other such sheltered
locale. In an environment where there is no readily avail -
able protection, such as barren and flat desert or plains, the
animal pulls the body far enough away to be removed from
the melee and out of range of whatever missile weapons the
enemy possesses (if any).
Asp Arrow
Skill: Conjuration
Arcane Knowledge: Animal
Difficulty: 16
Effect: 18 (4D damage, ignores nonmagical armor)
Range: 10 meters (+5)
Speed: Instantaneous (+5)
Duration: 1 minute (+9)
Casting Time: 1 round (-4)
Other Aspects:
Component (-4): A live asp or other poisonous snake (uncommon)
Focused (+5): On target
Gestures (-2): Crouch as if coiled like a snake, shape hand into a fist with two fingers extended like asp fangs, then spring and throw the gathered energy at target (fairly simple)
Incantations (-1): Make a snake-like sound (phrase)
To cast this spell, the mage must have a live asp or other
poisonous snake on his person. Usually, mages keep them in
small earthenware pots or reed baskets. By coiling himself as
a snake would, not only is he drawing upon energy to propel
the mystical arrow but is also tapping into the essence of the
snake itself. Once the mystical energy is released, an arrow
appears and flies toward the intended target, to a range of
10 meters. The mage must make a marksmanship/firearms or
apportation roll to hit the target. If the arrow flies true and
hits, it immediately transforms into a large asp and delivers
a poisonous bite., which causes 4D of damage each round
for one minute. The asp arrow must be fired in the round
after the mage casts the spell. The mage may add the result
point bonus of the spell to either the targeting total or the
first damage total.
(((illo s8-1)))
Bashing Fists
Skill: Conjuration
Arcane Knowledge: Folk
Difficulty: 10
Effect: 12 (Natural Hand-to-Hand Weapon: Fists (R2), +2D damage)
Range: Self (+0)
Speed: Instantaneous (+0)
Duration: 5 rounds (+7)
Casting Time: 3.5 seconds (-3)
Other Aspects:
Components (-3): Pair of black leather gloves (common)
Gestures (-3): Put on gloves (fairly simple); punch each fist into the other open hand (simple)
Incantations (-2): Let out an ear-splitting roar of rage (phrase, loud)
Other Alterant (+12): Opponent receives increased difficulties with each landed punch
To cast the spell, the mage must first put on a pair of black
leather gloves. The mage then lets out a roar as mighty as he
can muster and punches each of his fists into an open hand,
all the while feeling himself become overwhelmed with a
sense of pent-up rage. This violent urge must be released
within the next five rounds or it dissipates, and can only be
released in unarmed combat. The spell provides the Natural
Hand-to-Hand Weapons: Fists Special Ability, which gives the
attacker +2D to his unarmed Strength Damage. In addition
to damage inflicted, each blow landed by the mage pushes
his foe. This causes the victim to stumble, reducing all Agil-
ity/Reflexes or related totals by 3 until the mage’s turn in
the next round.
Beast Warden
Skill: Alteration
Arcane Knowledge: Animal
Difficulty: 20
Effect: 18 (+4D to intimidation)
Range: 10 meters (+5)
Speed: Instantaneous (+5)
Duration: 10 minutes (+14)
Casting Time: 1 round (-4)
Other Aspects:
Area Effect (+15): Sphere with radius of 3 meters
Components (-8): Rowan berries (uncommon, destroyed)
Countenance (-2): Animal appears menancing
Gestures (-2): Point from target to those to be guarded, bear teeth and snarl (fairly simple)
Incantations (-1): “Guard.” (phrase)
Unreal Effect (-8): Disbelief difficulty of 13
Other Alterants (+10): Animal will fight to the death to keep captives in area of effect
Other Conditions (-2): May only be used on animals who are friendly to the caster
To cast this spell, the mage must have a small supply ber-
ries harvested from a rowan tree. The mage points at the
animal he wishes to target, then at a creature or creature he
wishes the animal to guard, snarling and bearing his teeth
to get the point across. After uttering a simple command
word, the spell is cast. The target animal devotedly keeps
the specified beings in a confined area measuring three
meters in diameter by circling. In the eyes of its captives, the
animal’s countenance changes completely, become far more
frightening and imposing. As a result, the animal gains an
intimidation skill bonus of +4D.
Most captives are too frightened to attempt escape, save
for those who make a willpower/mettle roll of 13 to disbelieve
the spell’s effect. Captives attempting to escape find them -
selves harrassed immediately upon trying to leave the area
of effect. The animal attacks until either it or the prisoner
is dead or subdued.
While predators are most often targeted, this spell is by
no means limited to them. Herbivores, such as boars, deer,
and bulls, can be equally effective.
Blades of Flesh
Cantrip
Skill: Conjuration
Arcane Knowledge: Folk
Difficulty: 3
Effect: 6 (Natural Hand-to-Hand Weapon: Blades of Flesh (R1), +1D damage)
Range: Self or target within 1 meter (+0)
Speed: Instantaneous (+0)
Duration: 5 rounds (+7)
Casting Time: 1 round (-4)
Other Aspects:
Components (-3): Any bladed weapon (common)
Focused (+2): On target
Gestures (-2): Draw weapon across hand (fairly simple)
This spell gives the target a bonus of +1D to Strength
Damage for 25 seconds, or five rounds. With the simple slash
of a blade, the spell transforms the target’s hands, elbows,
and feet into lethal blades of flesh that can slash or pierce
as well as bludgeon.
Club Feet
Skill: Conjuration
Arcane Knowledge: Animal, Folk
Difficulty: 31
Effect: 36 (Hindrance: Club Feet (R12): +4 to the difficulty of any foot-related skill use and -4 to initiative rolls)
Range: 10 meters (+5)
Speed: Instantaneous (+5)
Duration: 10 minutes (+14)
Casting Time: 1 round (-4)
Other Aspects:
Focused (+10): On target
Gestures (-3): Mime tripping and falling, eyes focused on target (complex; acrobatics roll with difficulty of 11)
Incantations (-2): “I’m such a clumsy oaf.” (sentence)
While willingly causing himself to trip and fall (acrobatics
roll of 11 or fail the spell due to ineptitude), and casually
excusing himself for his clumsiness, the mage casts this
potent spell and curses a target not more than 10 meters
away. The curse twists the victim’s feet until they are hor -
ribly misshapen, rendering his legs so uncoordinated that
he can literally trip over himself. This is reflected by a +4
to the difficulties of various foot-related tasks and a -4 to
initiative totals. When the spell wears off 10 minutes later,
the character is restored immediately to normal.
Cobra Strike
Skill: Conjuration
Arcane Knowledge: Folk, Animal
Difficulty: 14
Effect: 18 (3D damage, ignores all armor)
Range: Touch (+0)
Speed: Instantaneous (+0)
Duration: 5 rounds (+7)
Casting Time: 1 round (-4)
Other Aspects:
Charges (+11): 2 improved charges released only with successful attack
Components (-6): Cobra skin gloves (very rare); flute (very common)
Focused (+5): On target
Gestures (-3): Play tune on a flute (complex; artist roll with difficulty of 11)
This spell requires the caster to wear cobra skin gloves
and have a flute. The mage casts the spell by playing a short
tune on her flute, the kind that snake-charmers use to lure
cobras from their wicker pots. On the next round, as the mage
attemtps to land an open-handed strike, her hand spreads out
like a hood, and the head of a cobra momentarily appears in
the palm to strike the target. On a successful attack, the blow
inflicts normal unarmed damage and for five rounds (starting
with the one in which the blow landed), the victim is poisoned
and takes 3D damge per round until duration ends.
(((illo s8-2)))
Courage
Skill: Alteration
Arcane Knowledge: Folk
Difficulty: 23
Effect: 30 (+6D+2 to willpower/mettle)
Range: Self (+0)
Speed: Instantaneous (+10)
Duration: 2.5 minutes (+11)
Casting Time: 1 round (-4)
Other Aspects:
Area of Effect (+25): Sphere with radius of 5 meters
Components (-4): Braided lion’s mane rope (very rare)
Concentration (-1): 3 seconds with willpower/mettle difficulty of 7
Feedback (-3): -3 to damage resistance totals
Gestures (-3): Hold the lion’s mane rope above the head and shake it while turning in a circle (complex; acrobatics roll with difficulty of 11)
Incantations (-3): “Fight by me, my friends, and together we’ll taste victory or achieve immortality” (sentence, loud)
Other Conditions (-2): Limited to sentient beings and those who are neutral or trusting of the mage
Casting this spell requires the mage to have a rope braided
from lion’s mane. He holds the rope aloft as a symbol of cour-
age and shakes it mightily as he turns in a complete circle,
demonstrating its importance to all around him.
For a period of more than two minutes thereafter, his mere
presence steadies his allies when terror would otherwise fill
their hearts and shake their resolve. All allies with a 5-meter
radius gain a willpower/mettle skill bonus of +6D+2 for resist-
ing fear, intimidation, or even pain and torture.
Under the influence of this spell, only the most weak
hearted of characters will break rather than present a stoic
face to their enemies. If a character affected by fear is ral -
lied by her companions, she may roll again to shake off the
effect. This spell can only be used on sentient beings, and it
only affects individuals who are neutral toward or trusting
of the mage.
Eagle-Eye
Skill: Divination
Arcane Knowledge: Folk, Avian
Difficulty: 20
Effect: 18 (+4D to search)
Range: 10 meters (+5)
Speed: Instantaneous (+5)
Duration: 1 minute (+9)
Casting Time: 5 rounds (-7)
Other Aspects:
Area of Effect (+15): Divination sphere with radius of 10 meters
Component (-8): Eye of an eagle (uncommon, destroyed)
Concentration (-3): 25 seconds with a willpower/mettle difficulty of 9
Focused (+5): On caster
Gestures (-1): Ingest the eagle’s eye (simple)
Variable Duration (+8): On/off switch
Other Conditions (-6): -6 to Agility/Reflexes and related totals while spell is active
The caster ingests an eye of an eagle, closes his eyes, and
concentrates. When he opens his eyes after 25 seconds, the
mage perceives a bird’s eye view of his surrounding area, as
though he was looking down from the vantage point of a
soaring eagle. The mage gains awareness of all objects within
10 meters of his person that are large enough to normally
be seen with his eye. However, the mage cannot see under
or through solid objects.
The area of effect moves with the caster until the spell
dissolves after one minute.
Creatures may attempt to hide from the mage, but he gains
a search bonus of +4D to see them because of his vantage
point. This may have the unintended and happy side effect
of preventing surprise — assuming the mage notices his
attackers before they strike.
The mage may target spells at anything he sees through
this spell as if he had line of sight. However, he must still
account for cover. For example, a character hiding behind
an overturned table still enjoys such cover as it provides,
even though he is clearly seen through the mage’s bird’s eye
view; remember, the spell still originates from the mage’s
physical form.
The unusual perspective can be disorienting for the mage,
and during the spell’s duration, he suffers -6 to all Agility/
Reflexes and related totals while spell is active.
Envy
Skill: Conjuration
Arcane Knowledge: Folk
Difficulty: 18
Effect: 9 (Quirk (R3), envy requiring a Very Difficult willpower/mettle roll to overcome Disadvantage)
Range: 10 meters (+5)
Speed: Instantaneous (+5)
Duration: 4 hours (+21)
Casting Time: 2 rounds (-5)
Other Aspects:
Concentration (-2): 1 round with willpower/mettle difficulty of 8
Feedback (-3): -3 to damage resistance totals
Focused (+6): On target
While casting this spell is moderately painful to the mage,
it might well be the death of the target. The caster curses a
humanoid target that she can see with four hours of extreme
envy. Envy is the desire to possess what others have. Those
afflicted with envy covet what others have —personality
traits, personal good fortune, and material goods. The need
to prove themselves, to obtain a perceived glory or possess
a valuable item, often places the individuals in potentially
dangerous situations — they might rush to disarm a trap,
push other characters aside to be the first to fight a foe, or race
to secure a treasure headless of potential risks. A character
targeted by this spell must make a Very Difficult  willpower/
mettle roll to overcome his envious impulses.
Gang Fight
Skill: Alteration
Arcane Knowledge: Folk
Difficulty: 27
Effect: 27 (+2D to brawling/fighting and melee combat; +2D to intimidation)
Range: 5 meters (+4)
Speed: Instantaneous (+4)
Duration: 5 rounds (+7)
Casting Time: 1 round (-4)
Other Aspects:
Focused (+6): On targets
Gestures (-3): Frown menacingly and point with authority at allies (complex; intimidation roll with difficulty of 11)
Incantations (-3): “Rip ’em apart, boys” (sentence, loud)
Multiple Targets (+18): Up to 6 targets
Other Conditions (-2): Targets must be allies of the caster and either outnumber the oppoents or have them at a decisive disadvantage
When the mage attempts to cast this spell, he must pres-
ent a commanding and frightful image by succeeding an
intimidation roll with a difficulty of 11. If she fails this, she
simply doesn’t present herself with enough menacing author-
ity and the spell doesn’t work. If successful, however, mage
makes up to six allies fight with ruthless vigor, employing all
manner of dirty tricks and providing them a bonus to their
close combat skills of +2D. It also lends them a menacing air,
resulting in an intimidation bonus of 2D.
The targets must outnumber their opponents or have a
marked disadvantage, because the thuglike tactics the caster
wishes her allies to employ depend to a large degree upon
intimidation and ganging-up on victims.
Gnawing Hunger
Skill: Conjuration
Arcane Knowledge: Animal, Folk
Difficulty: 35
Effect: 36 (4D damage, ignores all armor; Achilles’ Heel (R4), metabolic difference — must eat a meal every two hours or all mental and physical attributes decrease by 1 pip, with penalty increasing by 1 pip for each hour without food and disappearing with consumption of food )
Range: 10 meters (+5)
Speed: Instantaneous (+5)
Duration: 1 day (+25)
Casting Time: 1 round (-4)
Other Aspects:
Components (-2): Any food item that might be eaten by the intended target (ordinary, destroyed)
Countenance (-2): The caster’s  skin tightens around the cheeks in a sickly fashion
Focused (+12): On target
Gestures (-3): Double over in direction of the target as if suffering severe abdominal pain (fairly simiple)
Incantations (-3): “Hunger gnaws like a ravenous beast!” (sentence, loud)
To cast this spell, the mage must have in an item of food
that the target might reasonably be expected to eat (meat for
a carnivore, plants for an herbivore). She holds this item in
her hand while pointing a finger at the target, and when she
doubles over mimicking stomach pains as the food crumbles
to dust. While performing these actions, she utters a simple
but malicious phrase, after which the target suffers 4D damage
from intense stomach pains. The target literally begins starv-
ing to death and at an accelerated pace. ll mental and physical
attributes decrease by 1 pip (with the penalty increasing by
1 pip for each hour without food) due to weakness. These
penalties are negated once the target has eaten.
(((illo s8-3)))
Graceful Step
Skill: Alteration
Arcane Knowledge: Animal, Folk
Difficulty: 12
Effect: 18 (+1D+1 to acrobatics, dodge, and sneak/stealth)
Range: 1 meter (+0)
Speed: Instantaneous (+0)
Duration: 5 rounds (+7)
Casting Time: 1 round (-4)
Other Aspects:
Focused (+5): On target
Gestures (-2): Shake one leg, then the next (fairly simple)
This spell makes the target graceful for a period of five
rounds, which affects her acrobatics, dodge, and sneak/stealth
attempts and increases them by 1D+1.
Pollen Cloud
Skill: Conjuration
Arcane Knowledge: Plant
Difficulty: 14
Effect: 6 (2D of cover modifier)
Range: 3 meters (+3)
Speed: Instantaneous (+3)
Duration: 5 rounds (+7)
Casting Time: 1.5 seconds (-1)
Other Aspects:
Area of Effect (+15): Sphere with radius of 3 meters
Components (-2): Fresh flower bloom (very common, destroyed)
Feedback (-3): -3 to damage resistance total
Focused (+2): On target
Gestures (-1): Bring bloom to lips and gently blow (simple)
Incantations (-1): “Belladonna’s breath.” (phrase)
Other Conditions (-1): Spell negated by strong winds
With some minor pain to herself, the mage creates a cloud
of pollen. To cast this spell, she must have a fresh flower,
which she brings to her lips and then blows in the intended
direction. After uttering a simple incantation, a dense cloud of
pollen emerges from the bloom and quickly fills a six-meter-
wide sphere. The pollen cloud is as thick as fog, providing
2D of cover modifier. Under normal conditions, the cloud
dissipates after five rounds. However, in moderately windy
conditions it blows away after two rounds, and heavy winds
prevent the spell from working entirely.
Quick Release
Skill: Conjuration
Arcane Knowledge: Folk
Difficulty: 10
Effect: 12 (Fast Reactions (R1), +1D to initiative roll and one additional free action in each of 3 rounds, with Ability Loss (R1), only useful with throwing; +2D to throwing)
Range: Self (+0)
Speed: Instantaneous (+0)
Duration: 5 minutes (+13)
Casting Time: 3.5 seconds (-3)
Other Aspects:
Components (-6): Spearhead (common, destroyed)
Focused (+5): On caster
Gestures (-1): Squeeze palms together with spearhead between (simple)
The caster places a spearhead in his hands and crushes
it between his palms, leaving his hands bloodied and the
spearhead mere dust. Until the blood dries (a period of about
10 minutes), the mage becomes extremely fast at releasing
thrown weapons. This results in +1D bonus to his initiative
roll when wielding thrown weapons. In addition, because
he can release weapons with such amazing speed, he can
make an additional throwing attack in up to three rounds.
This spell provides no benefit when using missile weapons
or firearms.
Reveal Disposition
Skill: Divination
Arcane Knowledge: Folk
Difficulty: 16
Effect: 24 (willpower/mettle of 8D)
Range: 1 meter (+0)
Speed: Instantaneous (+0)
Duration: 10 minutes (+14)
Casting Time: 2 rounds (-5)
Other Aspects:
Concentration (-2): 10 seconds with willpower/mettle difficulty of 8
Feedback (-3): -3 to damage resistance totals
Focused (+7): On target
Gestures (-1): Make a gesture of friendship (simple)
Other Conditions (-3): Target must interact with the target; may only be used on a single sentient being who understand the caster’s language
This spell is particularly useful by individuals involved in
delicate diplomacy. After meditating in silence for 10 seconds,
the mage warmly introduces herself to the individual that she
wants to influence. The person must be a sentient being who
understands her language. If the target doesn’t comprehend
her, the spell and her time are wasted. Interpreters aren’t
sufficient, as the spell relies upon personal interaction and
common ground.
When the spell is successfully cast, the mage rolls the will-
power/mettle from the spell against the opponent’s willpower/
mettle. By beating this difficulty, the caster senses the target’s
disposition toward her by seeing a glowing aura around it.
The aura is visible only to the mage. A white light suggests
the target is friendly or trusting; a gray-shaded aura indicates
that he is neutral or ambivalent. A shadow falling over the
target indicates he is hostile or has superior standing.
Since this spell lasts for 10 minutes, the mage may track how
the target’s disposition changes over the course of negotia-
tions, allowing her to know the effectiveness of her diplomacy
and attempts to change the target’s disposition. Because the
mage can sense the nature of the target’s intentions (positive,
ambivalent, or harmful), she enjoys a willpower/mettle of 8D
when resisting his interaction attempts.
Sense Ailment
Skill: Divination
Arcane Knowledge: Animal, Folk
Difficulty: 11
Effect: 17 (medicine/healing of 5D+2)
Range: 1 meter (+0)
Speed: Instantaneous (+0)
Duration: 1 minute (+9)
Casting Time: 2 rounds (+5)
Other Aspects:
Component (-5): An egg (very common, destroyed); bowl of water (ordinary)
Concentration (-2): 10 seconds with willpower/mettle difficulty of 8
Gestures (-2): Run egg over patient and then crack it open into the bowl (fairly simple)
This spell allows a mage to tell if a creature suffers from the
effects of poison, disease, or illness. Before casting this spell,
she enters a trance-like state while she runs an egg repeat -
edly over the body of the patient. She then cracks it open
into a bowl of water. Using the skill provided by the spell,
the mage can interpret the egg’s appearance to determine
presence and type of disease, toxin, or injury.
If the egg yoke floats to the surface, the patient is free of
ailments. If the yoke sinks, on the other hand, the creature
is ill and the mage may figure out the cause.
The difficulty to detect the presence of an ailment is 7.
With five to eight result points, the mage understands the
nature of the ailment. With nine to 16 result points, the
caster knows the cure. With 17 or more result points, the
healer figures out the cause.
This spell does not heal a patient of his ailment, nor does
it provide any bonus to healing wounds or injuries.
(((insert illo 1-22 detect illness)))
Stick to Snake
Skill: Conjuration
Arcane Knowledge: Plant, Animal
Difficulty: 23
Effect: 40  (brawling/fighting of 5D; running of 2D; 5D physical damage; movement equal to result points in meters round with minimum of 1 meter per round)
Range: 1 meter (+0)
Speed: Instantaneous (+0)
Duration: 5 minutes (+13)
Casting Time: 1 minute (-9)
Other Aspects:
Component (-5): A long, thin dried stick (ordinary); rattlesnake tail rattle (uncommon)
Focused (+10): On stick
Gestures (-1): Shake rattlesnake rattle while holding stick (simple)
Incantations (-2): “Wood to flesh and stick to snake.” (sentence).
This spell turns a dead branch or other long pieces of thin,
dried wood (arrow shafts, broomsticks, and so on) into a
large and aggressive snake. To cast this spell, the mage must
have one hand on the wood while he shakes a rattlesnake tail
rattle. After reciting the incantation, he drops the stick and
watches as it comes to life as a flesh-and-blood snake.
If provoked, the snake attacks whomever or whatever is
near it. When killed or the spell expires, the snake reverts
back to its original form.
(((illo s8-4)))
Sticky Fingers
Cantrip
Skill: Alteration
Arcane Knowledge: Folk
Difficulty: 5
Effect: 9 (+2D to sleight of hand)
Range: Self (+0)
Speed: Instantaneous (+0)
Duration: 5 rounds (+7)
Casting Time: 1 round (-4)
Other Aspects:
Components (-4): Ball of wax (very common, destroyed)
Focused (+3): On caster
Gestures (-1): Rub fingers together (simple)
The caster places a small ball of wax in each hand and rubs
his fingers tips together, spreading the wax evenly over his
fingertips. His fingers then become sticky and more nimble,
allowing him to pick pockets, palm objects, and perform
similar actions that require deft motor control with unnatural
ease. As a result, the character gains a sleight of hand bonus
of +2D.
The sticky substance secreted by the character’s fingers is
not strong enough to have any direct application to climbing,
grappling, or any other related action that requires the use
of strength as opposed to mere deftness of hand.
Taken Alive
Skill: Alteration
Arcane Knowledge: Death, Folk
Difficulty: 15
Effect: 30 (+6D+2 to bluff/con)
Range: 1 meter (+0)
Speed: Instantaneous (+0)
Duration: 4 hours (+21)
Casting Time: 1 minute (-9)
Other Aspects:
Components (-12): Garment made of valuable fabric (uncommon, destroyed); fire, such as match or lit coal (very common, destroyed)
Concentration (-3): 25 seconds with a willpower/mettle difficulty of 9
Focused (+10): On target
Gestures (-1): Inhale smoke (simple)
Unreal Effect (-8): Disbelief difficulty of 13
Other Alterants (+2): Also works unconsciously
Other Conditions (-1): May only be used on those that understand the concepts of wealth and ransom
While casting the spell, the mage sets on fire a garment
made of valuable fabric, such as a foreign cloth or silk. She
then inhales the smoke while concentrating for almost half
a minute.
Once the casting is complete, the mage (or her desired tar-
get) exudes an aura that makes her enemies believe she is less
valuable dead than she is alive as ransom. When surrender-
ing, the caster gains a bluff/con bonus of +6D+2 to convince
opponents of her worth and to spare her life by taking her
prisoner, rather killing her. She also may bluff opponents
into believing her inflated worth even when unconscious or
otherwise incapacitated, as the enemy perceives noble stand-
ing or cultured bearing even in her motionless form.
Of course, the enemy will expect that a ransom is forthcom-
ing, and after the spell’s duration expires the captive mage
loses her bluff/con skill bonus and is no longer necessarily
viewed as a valuable commodity.
This spell only affects those that understand the concepts
of wealth and ransom.
Taunt
Skill: Alteration
Arcane Knowledge: Folk
Difficulty: 11
Effect: 18 (+4D to intimidation)
Range: Self (+0)
Speed: Instantaneous (+0)
Duration: 1 minute (+9)
Casting Time: 1 round (-4)
Other Aspects:
Focused (+5): On caster
Gestures (-2): Make a contemptous gesture at opponent (fairly simple)
Incantations (-3): “Is that the best you got?”, followed by piteous laughter (sentence, offensive)
Other Conditions (-2): May only be used attackers who understand the caster’s language and can hear the caster
This spell is cast with a smile that conveys contempt for
an opponent’s abilities, a taunting gesture that urges him to
attack the mage, and an insulting incantation that suggests
nothing but disdain. For a period of a minute thereafter, the
mage improves his initimidation skill by +5D when taunt -
ing his opponents in combat, goading them into anger and
careless action. He adds one-half of the difference between
the difficulty and the initimidation roll to any one attack or
defense attempt (not both) made at Point Blank or Short
range. This bonus works only if the opponent is actively
attacking the mage; the spell provides no bonus to a mage
fighting a creature that is purely defensive and doesn’t want
to fight. In addition, the spell only works against those who
can hear the mage speaking.
Voice Wrack
Skill: Conjuration
Arcane Knowledge: Folk
Difficulty: 19
Effect: 21 (Hindrance: Hoarse (R7), +3 to  difficulties of actions requiring a voice, such bargain, charm, con, command, intimidation, languages/speaking, and persuasion)
Range: 10 meters (+5)
Speed: Instantaneous (+5)
Duration: 1 minute (+9)
Casting Time: 1 round (-4)
Other Aspects:
Focused (+6): On target
Gestures (-2): Rub throat as if sore and then point at target (fairly simple)
Incantations (-1): Cough and whisper “steal voice.” (phrase)
Other Conditions (-2): Limited to those who can speak; spell has no effect at 1 meter or less from target
The mage rubs his throat as if it’s irritated, then points at
a target and, coughing, whispers a simple incantation. The
spell mutes the subject’s words so that his voice projects as
a mere whisper. Those within a meter of the target can hear
his words as normal, but those beyond that range are hard
pressed to make out a sound. Interactions with those further
than one meter distant are challenging (+3 to related difficul-
ties), because his voice carries no weight or inflection.
Wolfpack
Skill: Alteration
Arcane Knowledge: Animal
Difficulty: 17
Effect: 9 (+2D to brawling/fighting)
Range: 10 meters (+5)
Speed: Instantaneous (+5)
Duration: 5 rounds (+7)
Casting Time: 1 round (-4)
Other Aspects:
Components (-10): Something from the type of animal with which she wants to communicate (very common); tuff of wolf fur (uncommon, destroyed)
Focused (+3): On targets
Gestures (-2): Toss wolf fur at target creatures while holding the component of the animals to be affected (fairly simple)
Incantations (-2): “Fight like the wolf!” followed by a wolf-like howl (phrase, loudly)
Multiple targets (+24): 8 targets
Other Conditions (-1): Animals affected must outnumber their opponents
To cast the spell, the caster must have something from the
type of animal to be affected (feathers from a bird, shed snake
skin, hairs from a horse’s mane), as well as a tuff of wolf fur.
Upon uttering the incantation, the wolf fur is released and
is instantly consumed by magical fire.
This spell can be used on any animal or monster, but
sentient beings are unaffected. The target creatures must
also outnumber their opponents, because the rabid wolf-
like tactics induced by this spell depend upon the ability
to outflank and overwhelm their enemies. For five rounds,
all affected creatures fight with a ferocity and cunning that
provides them a brawling/fighting bonus of +2D.
((([Begin Sidebar] — goes anywhere in vitomancy
section)))
Wayward Practices of the Savage
Peoples of the Northwest Coast
Description/History:  This 200-page book was
originally published back in the 1880s, though later
handwritten notes surround much of the text. The
book itself was a treatise on the rites of various Indian
tribes inhabiting the British Columbia and Alaska
coasts, written by one Jonathon Whitelock. It’s a rather
bland treatise. More interesting, for arcane scholars,
is the handwritten portions that detail specific rituals
and spells.
The handwritten portions were set down by a dab -
bler in the arcane who went by the name of “Klondike
Ike” (actually, Ichobad Cranston), but he never finished
his work: It was 1898. The gold stampede was on, and
Klondike Ike went to make his fortune. With his wealth,
he’d publish his book and reveal his knowledge to the
world. But he never returned. The legend is that he
perished in an avalanche, buried several meters deep
in ice and snow.
Contents: The book contains a myriad of spells, all
cloaked under the guise of Indian rituals and prayers.
The spells appearing in the D6 Fantasy or D6 Adventure
Rulebook are communicate with animals  (“Commune
with Spirits of Our Forest Brothers”), meal or feast
(‘Nootka Blessing’), and scrying (“Asin’s Wisdom”).
Spells appearing in D6 Magic  include animal loyalty
(“Friendship of Our Forest Brothers”), asp arrow (“Arrow
of Sisiutl”), gnawing hunger (“Crying Stomach”), sense
ailment (“Ritual of Chulyen”), and stick to snake (“Sisiutl
in Wood”). Gamemasters may include any other spells
they desire.
Protections: If the book is pried from the cold,
lifeless grip of Klondike Ike, the ominous rumblings of
an impending avalanche can be heard. Unless escape
is immediate and swift, Klondike Ike may have eternal
company in his frozen grave.
Languages: The book is written in sloppy English,
but much of the handwritten notes use Indian words
and references that Klondike Ike was presumably
familiar with but that most readers would find com -
pletely alien.
Reading Period/Difficulty: The difficulty to deci-
pher each spell is a Moderate languages/reading/writing
roll and takes about 12 weeks.
((([End Sidebar])))

Photomancy
----------

Aura of Visibility
Skill: Alteration
Arcane Knowledge: Light
Difficulty: 10
Effect: 12 (negates up to 4D of darkness modifier)
Range: 10 meters (+5)
Speed: Instantaneous (+5)
Duration: 5 rounds (+7)
Casting Time: 2.5 seconds (-2)
Other Aspects:
Components (-6): Owl feather (common, destroyed)
Focused (+3): On target
Gestures (-2): Wave feather before his eyes while looking at intended target (fairly simple)
Incantations (-2): “Lift the shroud of darkness that I might see my enemy” (sentence)
With an intended target in sight and not more than 10
meters distant, the magic user waves an owl’s feather before
his eyes several times and utters an incantation. The feather
is then consumed in a brilliant, momentary flash of fire. Now
the target creature is bathed in an aura of shimmering white
light that only the magic user can see. The aura is so bright
that it negates up to -4D of darkness modifier (including the
effects of fog, smoke, and mist), allowing the mage to see
and attack the creature without penalty in even the most
complete darkness.
(((illo s5-1)))
Blur
Skill: Alteration
Arcane Knowledge: Darkness, Folk
Difficulty: 11
Effect: 18 (Blur (R2) Special Ability).
Range: Self or 1 meter (+0)
Speed: Instantaneous (+0)
Duration: 1 minute (+9)
Casting Time: 1 round (-4)
Other Aspects:
Focused (+5): On target
Gestures (-1): Wipe palm over eyes (simple)
Unreal Effect (-5): Disbelief difficulty of 13
With a casual swipe of a hand over his eyes, the mage
(or his chosen target) becomes indistinct to the naked eye
by bending light over his form. For a period of one minute,
the mage adds 2 to his dodge, stealth/sneak, and hide totals,
as +2 to all default search, tracking, investigation, and attack
difficulties against the mage. As this is an illusory spell,
characters may disbelieve the effects with a mettle/willpower
roll of 13. Those who succeed are thereafter able to see the
mage distinctly.
Glowing Eyes
Skill: Conjuration
Arcane Knowledge: Light
Difficulty: 16
Effect: 6 (Infamy (R2), feared by most because of glowing eyes)
Range: 10 meters (+5)
Speed: Instantaneous (+5)
Duration: 4 hours (+21)
Casting Time: 2 round (-5)
Other Aspects:
Concentration (-2): 1 round with willpower/mettle difficulty of 8
Focused (+5): On target
Feedback (-3): -3 to damage resistance total
With a minimal amount of pain to himself, the caster curses
a target with glowing eyes, thereby giving the creature the
look of that which is demon possessed or otherwise infernal
in nature. This makes it extremely difficult for the afflicted
to interact successfully with other beings, as people become
ill at ease by his unnatural appearance. The target has no
means of knowing that he has been cursed except perhaps
by looking in a mirror or other reflective surface.
In some cases, the spell may actually incur a bonus. If
the mage wanted to pass himself off as a demon or use it
against extremely superstitous folk, for example, it might
provide some minor skill total bonuses (determined by the
gamemaster).
Holy Light
Skill: Conjuration
Arcane Knowledge: Light
Difficulty: 35
Effect: 45 (Hindrance: Blindness (R15), +5 to difficulties of all sight-dependent actions)
Range: 10 meters (+5)
Speed: Instantaneous (+5)
Duration: 1 minute (+9)
Casting Time: 3.5 seconds (-3)
Other Aspects:
Gestures (-2): With head titled back and eyes closed as if basking in the sun’s warmth, extend arms out to the sides (fairly simple)
Incantations (-3): “The sun abhors darkness, and evil cowers from the light that is goodness.” (sentence, loud)
Multiple Targets (+15): Up to 5 targets
Other Conditions (-2): Only affects evil or undead beings who can see the caster
When cast, the magic user creates a bright flare of light
that seems to emanate from his being. Up to five evil or
undead targets within range and looking at the caster are
blinded by this light. All sight-based actions for the affected
increase by +5 for one minute.
Light Chest
Skill: Conjuration
Arcane Knowledge: Light, Dimension
Difficulty: 20
Effect: 18 (Armor Value of 6D, physical only)
Range: 1 meter (+0)
Speed: Instantaneous (+0)
Duration: 1 week (+29)
Casting Time: 3.5 minutes (-12)
Other Aspects:
Area of Effect (+5): Cuboid with height of 1 meter and sides of 2 meters
Components (-12): Crystal cube (very rare, destroyed); small glass disc (very common)
Concentration (-2): 5 seconds with a willpower/mettle difficulty of 8
Focused (+9): On glass disc
Gestures (-2): Hold crystal cube and disk in outstretched hands to catch the light, then place it at feet (fairly simple)
Incantations (-2): “Chest of light, secure what’s mine by right.” (sentence)
Variable Duration (+8): On/off switch with password set by mage
Other Alterants (+2): Can be carried; resistant to adverse environmental conditions (dust, rain, heat, etc.)
Other Conditions (-1): A source of illumination is present
The magic user casts this spell on a glass disc and a finely
crafted cube of crystal, which is destroyed and replaced by a
chest of radiant light. The chest had no weight, but its walls
and lid are solid and it can be moved.
When the spell is cast, the mage selects a password, and the
chest cannot be opened by any creature, including the mage,
unless the password is first spoken. Efforts at lockpicking are
futile. Any item, or combination of items, measuring less than
four cubic meters can be stored within the magical chest.
The chest lasts for one week and then disappears, leaving
behind the glass disk and any items that had been stored
within.
Light Ram
Skill: Conjuration
Arcane Knowledge: Light, Inanimate Forces
Difficulty: 17
Effect: 33 (4D physical damage; Reduced Attribute: Agility/Reflexes (R7), -2D to the attribute)
Range: 15 meters (+6)
Speed: Instantaneous (+6)
Duration: 1 round (+4)
Casting Time: 1.5 seconds (-1)
Other Aspects:
Components (-7): Horn or tusk of a charging animal (common); tuff of wool (very common, destroyed)
Countenance (-1): Mage appears drained and winded
Feedback (-3): -3 to damage resistance totals
Gestures (-2): Tuff of wool is released into the air and the horn violently shaken at the target (fairly simple)
Incantations (-1): “Unleash the might of light.” (phrase)
Other Alterant (+1): Effect appears as a powerful, charging animal
To cast this spell, the mage releases a tuff of wool into the
air (which is subsequently consumed by flame), shakes a ram’s
horn at an individual target, and utters a simple incantation.
Immediately thereafter, a shimmering mass of glowing light
appears, which vaguely discernible as a ram (or, in cultures
where more appropriate, a bull, bison, elephant, or other
powerful animal known for charging enemies). When this
unleashed force strikes a target within 15 meters, it deals
4D damage.
The force of the blow is overwhelming; targets hit by the
spell feel as if they have indeed been impacted by a raging
ram and are staggered, if not thrown back. As a result, a
character struck by the spell is also subject to a 2D penality
to Agility/Reflexes-related actions until the target’s turn in
the next round.
In addition to being used as a weapon, light ram can also
be used to batter down doors it strikes. This is particularly
handy during dungeon and building explorations.
The mage must succeed with a marksmanship/firearms or
apportation roll to hit the target.
(((illo s5-2)))
Light Show
Skill: Alteration
Arcane Knowledge: Light
Difficulty: 14
Effect: 16 (lights with charm/persuasion of 5D+1)
Range: 60 meters (+9)
Speed: Instantaneous (+9)
Duration: 1 minute (+9)
Casting Time: 1 round (-4)
Other Aspects:
Components (-8): Jar of fireflies or similar glowing insects (uncommon, destroyed)
Gestures (-2): Point finger at target and release fireflies (fairly simple)
Incantations (-1): “Watch and be amazed.” (phrase)
To cast this spell, the mage must have a jar of living fireflies
or similar insects. He simply says a few words of power, points
a finger at the target, and releases the fireflies (which die upon
the spell expiring). For a period of one minute, the fireflies
become flashing, dancing orbs of glowing light, many times
greater in intensity than normal and far more enthralling.
Should the target fail an opposed interaction roll against
the light’s charm/persuasion of 5D+1, the target of the spell
is compelled to do nothing but watch them.
If the entranced creature is harmed, it recovers its senses
and is no longer affected by the spell.
Mass Light Show
Skill: Conjuration
Arcane Knowledge: Light
Difficulty: 24
Effect: 15 (lights with charm/persuasion of 5D)
Range: 100 meters (+10)
Speed: Instantaneous (+10)
Duration: 1 minute (+9)
Casting Time: 1 round (-4)
Other Aspects:
Area of Effect (+20): 10-meter radius circle
Components (-8): Jar of fireflies or similar glowing insects (uncommon, destroyed)
Gestures (-2): Point finger at target and release fireflies (fairly simple)
Incantations (-2): “Watch and be amazed, one and all” (sentence)
After saying a few words of power and pointing a finger at
the center of the intended 10-meter circle area of effect, she
releases the fireflies (which die upon the spell expiring). For
a period of one minute the fireflies become flashing, dancing
orbs of bright, enthralling light. All living creatures within
the area of effect must make an opposed interaction roll
against the spell’s charm/persuasion of 5D or be compelled to
do nothing but watch them. Harming any entranced creature
breaks the spell.
Night Vigilance
Skill: Alteration
Arcane Knowledge: Darkness
Difficulty: 15
Effect: 18 (+4D to search)
Range: Self or target within 1 meter (+0)
Speed: Instantaneous (+0)
Duration: 4 hours (+21)
Casting Time: 1 round (-4)
Other Aspects:
Components (-8): Owl’s eye (uncommon, destroyed)
Focused (+7): On target
Gestures (-2): Pass the owl eye over the eyes of the target
Incantations (-1): “See better.” (phrase)
Other Conditions (-1): Can only be cast at night
This spell uses an owl’s eye to increase the nighttime
vigilance and acuity of a single individual. The mage utters
a short phrase while passing the component over the eyes
of the intended target. When the spell is cast, the owl’s eye
turns to dust.
The subject of this spell becomes extremely attuned to the
night and unusually aware of his surroundings for a period
of four-hours. During this time, the character gains a search
bonus of +5D. However, this spell in no way reduces the need
for sleep or the negative effects resulting from lack of rest.
The target of the spell must still sleep 4+ hours or suffer the
effects of fatigue.
Nyctophobia
Skill: Conjuration
Arcane Knowledge: Darkness, Folk
Difficulty: 19
Effect: 9 (Quirk (R3), nyctophobia with Very Difficult will- power/mettle roll to overcome)
Range: 10 meters (+5)
Speed: Instantaneous (+5)
Duration: 10 minutes (+14)
Casting Time: 2 round (-5)
Other Aspects:
Concentration (-2): 1 round with willpower/mettle difficulty of 8
Focused (+4): On target
Feedback (-3): -3 to damage resistance total
Other Conditions (-1): Limited to sentient beings
Though the caster of this spell endures some pain to her-
self, she curses a person with a severe case of nyctophobia
(fear of the dark or night) for 10 minutes. Characters that
are overcome by their fright dissolve into quivering wrecks.
They can take no actions until the darkness is eliminated or
they’re removed from the darkened environment (at which
point they may make another attempt to overcome the
fright using willpower/mettle or the default attribute). The
expiration of the spell’s duration immediately returns the
target to normal.
(((illo s5-3)))
Shadow Surface
Skill: Conjuration
Arcane Knowledge: Darkness
Difficulty: 27
Effect: 20 (difficulty to view hidden area or dispel darkness shrouding it)
Range: 2.5 meters (+2)
Speed: Instantaneous (+2)
Duration: 1 year (+38)
Casting Time: 1 hour (-18)
Other Aspects:
Area of Effect (+18): Sphere with 3-meter radius and shape decided on at casting
Components (-4): Stick of charcoal (very common, destroyed)
Countenance (-1): Caster develops dark rings under eyes during casting time
Gestures (-2): Outline the area of effect with charcoal (fairly simple)
Other Conditions (-2): Limited to areas continuously in darkness or shadow
Shadow surface allows a mage to create illusionary walls,
floors, ceilings, or other surfaces out of darkness. To cast
it, the wizard outlines the illusionary surface’s dimensions
with a charcoal stick.
The surface appears absolutely real when viewed, but
physical objects may pass through it effortlessly. The spell
is often used to mask doors, pits, or traps within tombs,
fortresses, or other areas intended to be secure. Touch or
probing searches  always reveal the true nature of the surface,
though they do not cause the illusion to disappear. The only
means by which the illusion might be removed, save for its
duration expiring, is by exposure to a light source strong
enough to negate it.
Shroud of Shade
Skill: Conjuration
Arcane Knowledge: Darkness, light, entity
Difficulty: 10
Effect: 12 (Armor Value of 4D, physical only)
Range: Self or target within 1 meter (+0)
Speed: Instantaneous (+0)
Duration: 2.5 hours (+20)
Casting Time: 1 round (-4)
Other Aspects:
Components (-8): Fragment of a funeral shroud from an occupied grave (uncommon, destroyed).
Gestures (-1): Hold shroud fragment over the target’s head (simple)
Focused (+6): On target
Incantations (-2): “Dark force rising, protect thee from the light.” (sentence)
Other Conditions (-3): Limited to those creatures physically harmed by exposure to sunlight or bright light; only protects against light
Typically, this spell is used on vampires and demons. By
holding a fragment of a burial shroud over herself or another
being within a meter range, the caster creates an ethereal
shroud that protects the target from the damaging rays of
the sun. The shroud appears as a dark and filmy cape and
hood that covers the target’s entire body. As a result, the
target is nearly immune to the effects of normal sunlight
for a short time and might walk about unaffected, a valuable
boon for vampires.
At the time of casting, the mage can convert the result
points from the casting into a bonus to protection or dura-
tion. Convert the bonus points put into the effect into dice
and pips of Armor Value (three points per die; one point
per pip). Use the “Spell Measures” chart in the D6 Fantasy
or D6 Adventure rulebooks to determine the addition to the
duration in seconds.
Sight of Darkness
Skill: Conjuration
Arcane Knowledge: Light, darkness
Difficulty: 20
Effect: 9 (Infravision or Ultravision (R3), negates up to 6 points of modifiers for dim or dark conditions)
Range: 10 meters (+5)
Speed: Instantaneous (+5)
Duration: 1 day (+25)
Casting Time: 1 round (-4)
Other Aspects:
Components (-2): Flint and tinder (common)
Feedback (-3): -3 to damage resistance total
Focused (+6): On target
Incantations (-1): “See.” (phrase)
By the magic user sacrificing some of her life energy, she
grants a target with 24 hours of three ranks in Infravision
or Ultravision (which the caster chooses before casting the
spell). See the description of this Special Abilities in the
“Character Options” chapter for more details.
Sinister Pall
Skill: Alteration
Arcane Knowledge: Darkness
Difficulty: 11
Effect: 18 (+4D to intimidation)
Range: Self (+0)
Speed: Instantaneous (+0)
Duration: 1 minute (+9)
Casting Time: 1 round (-4)
Other Aspects:
Gestures (-2): Scowl darkly and clench fists menacingly (simple, offensive)
With a scowl and general menacing countenance, the
caster improves her intimidation skill for one minute. Her
features become shadowed and sinister, like the villain from
a horror movie. People are naturally unsettled by the cast -
ers appearance and therefore more prone to bending to the
force of his will.
(((illo s5-4)))
Sniper Light Beam
Skill: Alteration
Arcane Knowledge: Light
Difficulty: 10
Effect: 18 (+4D to one targeting skill)
Range: Self (+0)
Speed: Instantaneous (+0)
Duration: 1 minute (+9)
Casting Time: 3.5 seconds (-3)
Other Aspects:
Gestures (-2): Run trigger finger down the length of weapon (fairly simple).
Other Conditions (-2): May only be used with a single direct-fire, self-powered projectile weapon, such as a crossbow or a gun
This spell creates a light beam that extends down the sights
of a projectile weapon, effectively serving as a sniper’s laser
sight. This improves the mage’s related ranged combat skill
when using that weapon for a period of one minute. This
bonus cannot be used with weapons that depend strength
for their power, such as bows or slings.
Stunt Plant
Skill: Alteration
Arcane Knowledge: Darkness, Plant
Difficulty: 10
Effect: 5 (reduce movement difficulty modifiery by up to -5)
Range: Self (+0)
Speed: Instantaneous (+0)
Duration: 3.5 minutes (+12)
Casting Time: 1 round (-4)
Other Aspects:
Area Effect (+10): 5-meter-radius circle
Countenance (-1): Caster takes on a gray pallor
Focused (+3): On caster
Gestures (-2): Spread hands in intended direction and lower as if pressing down on something (fairly simple)
Incantations (-3): “Diminish, plants! Shrivel and die!” (sentence, loud)
The caster literally presses back plant life before her,
diminishing or even killing them through the deprivation
of light. All plants require light to grow. The effect lasts for
three and a half minutes. Vegetation (grasses, briars, shrubs,
trees) within five meters of the caster shrink a quarter of its
normal size each round, becoming less bushy and entangling.
This allows for freer movement within the area of effect.
Assuming plants haven’t died completely, they begin to
slowly rejuvenate as soon as the spell is complete, growing
as per normal for the plant species in question. Trees may
take years or even decades to return to their previous state,
while grass may require only a few weeks.
Sun Scourge
Skill: Conjuration
Arcane Knowledge: Light, Fire
Difficulty: 16
Effect: 9 (Achilles’s Heel (R3), 5D damage and +20 to survival and stamina difficulties in desert environments each day the character is in the sun — values are not cumulative)
Range: Touch (+0)
Speed: Instantaneous (+0)
Duration: 1 week (+29)
Casting Time: 1 round (-4)
Other Aspects:
Components(-4): Ashes of creature desiccated by the sun (uncommon)
Feedback (-2): -2 to damage resistance totals
Focused (+7): On target
Gestures (-2): Raise arms toward the sun and sprinkle the ashes to the wind (fairly simple)
Incantations (-2): “Like a scythe, O mighty sun; cut down thy enemies.” (sentence)
Other Conditions (-2) Can only be cast when the sun is visible
The mage makes an offering of ashes to the sun and calls
upon its power, which she channels through her body. Then,
with a minimal amount of pain to herself and a simple
touch, the caster inflicts pain to an opponent as if he were
being burnt by the sun’s searing rays. It also makes him
unusually susceptible to the harsh effects of the sun. If the
victim opposes the touch —as most aware and able-bodied
beings would — the mage must make a successful brawling/
fighting attack.
Sun Cage
Skill: Conjuration
Arcane Knowledge: Light
Difficulty: 31
Effect: 37 (15 for resistance total of bars; negates up to 4D of darkness modifier)
Range: 25 meters (+7)
Speed: Instantaneous (+7)
Duration: 1 hour (+18)
Casting Time: 1 minute (-9)
Other Aspects:
Area of Effect (+15): Sphere with a radius of 3 meters
Gestures (-3): Mime escaping from a cell with eyes squinted as if blinded by glaring light, then point at target (complex; acrobatics roll with difficulty of 11)
Unreal Effect (-10): Disbelief difficulty of 13
Light cage traps a target in a prison of magical sunlight.
After miming escaping from a cell and indicating the intended
target, the mage must make a marksmanship/firearms or ap-
portation roll that beats the combat difficulty for the target.
If she succeeds, the target is trapped in a sphere with a radius
of three meters. (Creatures larger than that cannot be con-
fined by this spell.) The cage glows radiantly, bright enough
to illuminate within one meter in all directions.
The result point bonus plus 15 serves as the damage resis-
tance totals of the bars. The target can disbelieve and thus
free himself by generating a disbelief total of 13.
Turn to Shadow
Skill: Conjuration
Arcane Knowledge: Darkness
Difficulty: 16
Effect: 33 (Intangibility (R1), +3D to damage resistance total against physical attacks and movement is halved; Invisibil- ity (R3), +3 to dodge, sneak/stealth, and hide: self totals and +3 to search, tracking,  investigation, and attack difficulties against target)
Range: Self (+0)
Speed: Instantaneous (+0)
Duration: 5 rounds (+7)
Casting Time: 3.5 minutes (-12)
Other Aspects:
Components (-2): Dark clothes (very common)
Concentration (-1): 3 seconds with willpower/mettle difficulty of 7
Focused (+8): On target
Other Conditions (-1): Must be immersed in darkness or shadow during casting time
To cast this spell, the mage must be wearing dark clothes
and devoid of any shiny objects that would catch and reflect
light. He must also be immersed in darkness or shadow at
the time of casting. The darkness need not be absolute; even
a shadowy corner of an inn’s common room is enough. When
the spell is cast, the mage transforms himself into a living
shadow. He has no mass and therefore makes no noise and
leaves no track of his passage, moves at half his normal rate,
may assume any general shape (though details are not pos-
sible), and may flow through tiny openings.
Because he is insubstantial, most physical attacks pass
right through the mage. However, he in turn cannot attack
in this form, nor can he speak or uses spells that require
biological conditions (incantations, for example, or handling
of material components).
Veil of Darkness
Skill: Conjuration
Arcane Knowledge: Folk, Darkness
Difficulty: 12
Effect: 12 (+4D darkness modifier)
Range: 10 meters (+5)
Speed: Instantaneous (+5)
Duration: 5 rounds (+7)
Casting Time: 2.5 seconds (-2)
Other Aspects:
Countenance (-1): The mage looks drained, with dark rings around eyes
Focused (+3): On target
Gestures (-2): Cover eyes with a hand, then a throwing mostion at a target (fairly simple)
Incantations (-3): “You see NOTHING!” (sentence, loud)
The mage covers his eyes with a hand, drawing energy from
within himself, and then throws a ball of pure darkness at a
target. He must make a marksmanship/firearms or apporta-
tion roll to hit the target, and may throw the spell up to 10
meters distant. Hit targets find themselves blinded by a veil
of darkness that covers their eyes, imposing a +4D darkness
difficulty modifier on all relevant actions performed by this
creature for a period of 25 seconds. The bolt of darkness must
be fired in the same round that the mage casts the spell.
Vengeful Void
Skill: Conjuration
Arcane Knowledge: Darkness, Water
Difficulty: 24
Effect: 45 ( brawling/fighting of 4D; lifting/lift of 5D; 6D physical damage)
Range: 5 meters (+4)
Speed: Instantaneous (+4)
Duration: 3 rounds (+6)
Casting Time: 1 round (-4)
Other Aspects:
Gestures (-1): Point at an intensely dark area (simple)
Incantations (-3): “Rise, darkness, and avenge me. I command it.” (sentence, loud)
Other Conditions (-3): A void of darkness in an otherwise illuminated environment
To cast this spell, a void of darkness or dense shadow (such
as a deep pit, a nonilluminated dungeon room, or a shadowy
alley) must be present. The mage then shouts some words of
power and points toward the black spot. Through this spell,
the mage animates the darkness of the void into a tidal-wave-
like mass that strikes down upon opponents with rage. The
darkness grabs an opponent within five meters brawling/fight-
ing of 4D and inflicts 6D damage. Once captured, the target
is dragged back into the depths of the monster on the next
round, though the opponent may attempt to escape the void’s
lifting/lift of 5D. Those dragged into the void obviously must
contend with whatever dangers might lurk within (falling
damage from a pit, for example). Additionally, the darkness
inflicts its normal damage on the trapped creature. Creatures
trapped within the darkness feel as if they are drowning and
being crushed by the pressures of deep water.
(((illo s5-5)))
Wall of Radiance
Skill: Conjuration
Arcane Knowledge: Light
Difficulty: 15
Effect: 18 (negates up to -4D of darkness modifier; provides +2D cover modifier)
Range: 10 meters (+5)
Speed: Instantaneous (+5)
Duration: 3.5 minutes (+12)
Casting Time: 1 round (-4)
Other Aspects:
Area Effect (+6): Circle with radius of 3 meters
Components (-10): A handful of crystal shards (uncommon, destroyed); lit candle (very common)
Gestures (-2): Throw crystals into air and blow the flames of a candle toward them (fairly simple)
The magic user throws a handful of crystal fragments in
the direction in which he wishes to create the wall of radi -
ance. Then he blows the flames of a lit candle into the falling
shards. A shield-like wall of shimmering white light measuring
three meters in diameter appears at a distance of up to 10
meters from the caster.
The wall is immobile and remains in that position for three
and a half minutes. The light is so brilliant that it negates
up to 4D of darkness modifier within one meter. Its bright-
ness provides a +2D cover modifier against anyone attacking
from the other side of the barrier. The wall does not offer
any physical barrier to attack or movement.
((([Begin Sidebar — may go
anywhere in photomancy
setcion])))
Do Not Disturb
A small, digest-sized book, this tome smells of mold
and the pages feel damp and cold. Anyone leafing
through the book finds the scent of decay transfers to
their fingers for the next 1D hours (resulting in a +1
difficulty modifier to relevant interactions rolls due to
the stench). Their fingers also feel numb with cold for
the same duration (+1 difficulty modifier for relevant
difficulties).
The book belonged to Theresa Silva, a Portuguese
nun who was seduced by the devil and subsequently
began delving into the dark arts. After she found this
tome, she locked herself in her quarters and secluded
herself. In her room, she died, still poring over this evil
tome. Some say she died of starvation; others avow it
was the book itself that killed her. In either event, it
was her obsession with the book and the secrets that
it contained that was Theresa’s undoing.
Contents: This flimsy spell book contains only a
few spells, all of which are have infernal names. These
include fear (“Song of Abigor”), scrying (“Vision of
Ahriman”), and sense past (“Balam’s Sign”) from the D6
Fantasy or D6 Adventure Rulebooks, as well as shroud of
darkness (“Vestments of the Order of the Fly”), shroud
of shade (“Shetan’s Shroud”), sinister pall (“Darkness
Embraced”), and Turn to Shadow (“Skin of Flauros, the
Black Leopard”).
Protection: Anyone who so much as reads a single
page of the book becomes obsessed with learning its
secrets. He’ll spend every available moment studying,
to the detriment of everything else in his life. At the
same time, he becomes extremely protective of it, sure
that everyone wants to take it from him or prevent him
from unlocking its mysteries. As a result, the reader
acquires paranoia and dependency (both rank 3 Quirks
— the character does not receive points for these).
Little does anyone know that, even in death, Theresa
remains jealously protective of the book. Her ghost is
tied to it, and she tries to feed the reader’s fears until
he destroys himself as she once did.
Reading Period/Difficulty: The spells recited in
the text are universally incorrect in minor but crucial
details. As a result, the reading period is extremely long
for such a small tome (13 weeks) and the languages/
reading/writing difficulty level is similarly high (15).
((([End Sidebar] )))

Peregrination
-------------

Alter Gravity
Skill: Apportation
Arcane Knowledge: Inanimate Forces
Difficulty: 12
Effect: 12 (moves up to 250 kilograms)
Range: Self (+0)
Speed: Instantaneous (+0)
Duration: 1 hour (+18)
Casting Time: 1 minute (-9)
Other Aspects:
Focused (+6): On caster
Gestures (-2): Point up and then down (fairly simple)
Incantations (-1): “Alter.” (phrase)
With this spell, a magic user can walk on walls or ceilings
by changing the direction of gravity for herself. Each time
she wishes to change direction, she merely needs to say,
“Alter.”
((( insert illo s4-1 alter gravity)))
Beacon
Skill: Alteration
Arcane Knowledge: Enchanted
Difficulty: 13
Effect: 18 (+4D to willpower/mettle when bead used as planar homing beacon)
Range: Touch (+0)
Speed: Instantaneous (+0)
Duration: 1 day (+25)
Casting Time: 1 hour (-18)
Other Aspects:
Components (-2): Glass bead (very common)
Concentration (-6): 1 hour with willpower/mettle difficulty of 12
Focused (+8): On glass bead
This spell serves little purpose on its own, but when used
in conjunction with the shift planes spell (or a similar spell),
it gives the caster +4D to her willpower/mettle roll when
attempting to return from another plane. The same magic
user must cast both spells, as the spells are attuned to her
senses.
So long as the glass bead  remains in the originating
dimension, the bonus is granted to the caster. If the glass
bead is destroyed or shifted to another plane, then all trace
of it is lost.
Beckon Creature
Skill: Apportation
Arcane Knowledge: Animal, entity, folk
Difficulty: 36
Effect: 24 (compared to roll of target’s willpower/mettle or governing attribute)
Range: 10 kilometers (+20)
Speed: Instantaneous (+20)
Duration: 1 minute (+9)
Casting Time: 1 round (-4)
Other Aspects:
Components (-1): Fur, feather, or tooth (ordinary)
Gestures (-1): Welcoming gestures (simple)
Incantations (-1): “Arrive.” (phrase)
Variable Movement (+5): Bending/unseen target
Any creature of the gamemaster’s choice, or randomly
determined, can be called upon with this spell. The effect’s
value plus the spell’s result point bonus is compared to a roll
of the target’s willpower/mettle (or the governing attribute) to
see if the spell successfully latches on. If it does, the beckoned
beast arrives instantly — and, if the caster can convince it,
to assist her in combat for the duration of the spell.
Bind Reality
Skill: Alteration
Arcane Knowledge: Dimension
Difficulty: 35
Effect: 27 (compare to spell total of dimension-hopping spell)
Range: 1 meter (+0)
Speed: Instantaneous (+0)
Duration: 1 day (+25)
Casting Time: 2.5 hours (-20)
Other Aspects:
Area Effect (+50): Sphere with radius of 10 meters
Concentration (-6): 1 hour with willpower/mettle difficulty of 12
Gestures (-2): Make an encompassing gesture (fairly simple)
Other Alterant (+1): Sphere glows when triggered
Other Conditions (-5): Difficult scholar roll to recall information about the protected dimension
With this spell, a magic user can seal a 10-meter sphere,
preventing the opening or portals going to or coming from
other planes. Any caster or creature attempting to open a
gateway or shift into the affected area of this spell must
overcome the value of this spell’s effect. Any unsuccessful
attempt to get in or out warns the caster with a glow on the
sphere. This spell is useful when trying to prevent a prisoner
from escaping, or an unwanted entity from entering a given
location.
Blur Barriers
Skill: Conjuration
Arcane Knowledge: Dimension
Difficulty: 33
Effect: 36 (+1D difficulty modifier to physical and mental attributes)
Range: 10 meters (+5)
Speed: Instantaneous (+5)
Duration: 5 minutes (+13)
Casting Time: 1 minute (-9)
Other Aspects:
Area Effect (+20): Sphere with radius of 4 meters
Concentration (-3): 1 minute with willpower/mettle difficulty of 9
Gestures (-1): Wiggle fingers on one hand (simple)
For a short period of time, the magic user forms a nexus
of dimensions. If successful, the caster weakens the barriers,
resulting in nothing functioning as it normally does.The natu-
ral, physical laws of the occupied dimension become unstable.
Everyone within the area of effect is subject to an increase in
the difficultiles of all physical and mental actions.
Contact Entity
Skill: Divination
Arcane Knowledge: entity, dimension
Difficulty: 13
Effect: 61 (4D languages/speaking in the language of the target entity; 49 compared to planar distance)
Range: Self (+0)
Speed: Instantaneous (+0)
Duration: 1 hour (+18)
Casting Time: 1 minute (-9)
Other Aspects:
Concentration (-3): 1 minute with willpower/mettle difficulty of 9
Other Conditions (-3): Must be knowledgeable of the entity to be contacted, which requires a scholar roll of 11
Provided that the caster has some knowledge of the entity
or type of entity she wishes to contact, it’s possible to open a
channel to that being. If the spell is successful and the distance
to the entity’s location has a planar value of 49 or less, the
caster gains 4D languages in the language of the target. This
only lasts for the duration of the spell.
Contacting a creature from another plane does not guar-
antee that it is willing to communicate. Convincing it is left
to the caster.
Decrease Gravity
Skill: Alteration
Arcane Knowledge: inanimate forces
Difficulty: 34
Effect: 30 (Hindrance: Low Gravity (R5), +5 to acrobatics, brawling/fighting, and melee combat difficulties; Skill Bonus: Low Gravity (R5), +5 to lifting/lift, running,  and throwing totals)
Range: 15 meters (+6)
Speed: Instantaneous (+6)
Duration: 1 minute (+9)
Casting Time: 2 rounds (-5)
Other Aspects:
Area Effect (+25): Sphere with radius of 5 meters
Concentration (-2): 2 rounds of concentration with willpower/mettle difficulty of of 8
Gestures (-1): Clench fist and point (simple)
Incantations (-1): “Light.” (phrase)
At the indicated site, the caster decreases gravity for a
10-meter wide area. This causes certain physical actions to
receive modifiers to their difficulties or totals (see the “effect”
description for details).
As this is a magical adjustment in gravity, it does not affect
victims in exactly the same way as a normal loss of gravity.
Furthmore, anyone or anything leaving the area of effect
loses any modifiers given by the spell.
Dimensional Gap
Skill: Conjuration
Arcane Knowledge: dimension
Difficulty: 41
Effect: 21 (7D physical damage)
Range: 40 meters (+8)
Speed: Instantaneous (+8)
Duration: 1 round (+4)
Casting Time: 1 round (-4)
Other Aspects:
Area Effect (+50): Hemisphere with radius of 10 meters
Components (-1): Two rocks (ordinary)
Concentration (-3): 1 round with willpower/mettle at difficulty 9
Gestures (-2): Slam the components against each other (fairly simple)
When the caster brings the components of the spell
together, the targeted location makes a dimensional gap in
the earth, creating a large hole in the ground. The shape is
spherical, thereby causing vehicle or creatures at the edge to
roll down the side into the center. Should the gap be created
directly beneath a creature, it drops straight down, suffering
7D damage. Damage to those who are not at ground zero
is reduced accordingly by the area effect rules discussed in
the “Magic” chapter of the D6 Adventure  and D6 Fantasy
rulebooks.
When the hole disappears, anything that fell into the pit
is now in a heap on the mysteriously whole ground.
Dimensional Survival
Skill: Alteration
Arcane Knowledge: dimension, folk
Difficulty: 26
Effect: 18 (Atmospheric Tolerance (R2); Environmental Resistance (R2))
Range: Self or within 1 meter (+0)
Speed: Instantaneous (+0)
Duration: 1 day (+25)
Casting Time: 1 round (-4)
Other Aspects:
Area Effect (+10): Circle with radius of 5 meters
Concentration (-2): 1 round with willpower/mettle difficulty of 8
Focused (+8): On caster
Other Conditions (-4): Must be knowledgeable of the plane in which the morphed characters are to travel, requiring a scholar roll of 15
All who are affected by this spell are transformed physi -
cally so they can survive on a hostile dimension. Once the
spell is successfully cast, it operates upon all who are within
five meters of the mage, giving them half the ranks in the
Special Abilities as the caster. Anyone who leaves the circle
of influence loses the immunity and cannot regain it simply
by getting close the mage again.
Energy Barrier
Skill: Conjuration
Arcane Knowledge: inanimate forces
Difficulty: 30
Effect: 13 (Armor Value of 4D+1, physical only)
Range: 5 meters (+4)
Speed: Instantaneous (+4)
Duration: 1 minute (+9)
Casting Time: 1 round (-4)
Other Aspects:
Area Effect (+40): Circle with radius of 20 meters
Concentration (-2): 1 round with willpower/mettle difficulty of 6
Gestures (-1): Point at the spot where the barrier is to be formed (simple)
Feedback (-3): -3 to damage resistance total
The mage can alter the forces that bind and form the
dimension in which she dwell, shifting them to her will.
By simply pointing and concentrating, the mage creates a
barrier providing 4D+1 protection from attacks. All beings
and objects behind the 20-meter area gain this advantage,
combining with existing armor. Of course, the limitation
to this spell is that the defense is 2 dimensional. Once cast,
barrier cannot be relocated or altered, allowing for opponents
to readily move around the side — providing they known
enough to do this.
Ethereal
Skill: Alteration
Arcane Knowledge: dimensions
Difficulty: 18
Effect: 15  (Intangibility (R1), +3D to damage resistance total against physical attacks and movement is halved)
Range: 10 meters (+5)
Speed: Instantaneous (+5)
Duration: 10 minutes (+14)
Casting Time: 3 rounds (-6)
Other Aspects:
Concentration (-2): 1 round with willpower/mettle difficulty of 6
Focused (+5): On target
When cast upon a character, the mage shifts the person
between dimensions, making them ethereal. The character
is visible, and still exists, but her being is spread among
many worlds. For the duration of this spell, she gains the
Intangibility (R1) Special Ability.
((( insert illo s4-2 erase person)))
Erase Person
Skill: Alteration
Arcane Knowledge: dimension
Difficulty: 61
Effect: 88 (10D physical damage, ignore nonmagical armor; up to 100 years in the past)
Range: Touch (+0)
Speed: Instantaneous (+0)
Duration: 100 years (+43)
Casting Time: 1 hour (-18)
Other Aspects:
Concentration (-9): 1 hour with willpower/mettle difficulty of 15
Focused (+26): On target
Other Conditions (-8): A roll of a 1 on the Wild Die in the caster being erased, even if the difficulty number was equaled or exceeded; may only be used once per target
This deadly spell not only instantly kills the target, but also
obliterates her history from the universe. Upon contact with
the target, by means of a successful brawling/fighting roll, a
shroud of blackness envelops the victim, erasing her from
existence. As each person is linked through time and space,
the thread that formed her history is followed and destroyed.
This means that all memories, all written words, all history
is removed. It is as if the character had never existed. This
spell is not a charged spell. Only one opportunity to erase a
person is granted per casting of the spell, and that opportunity
occurs in the round after the spell’s completion.
As with powerful spells, there is the potential for disaster.
If the caster rolls a one on the Wild Die, it is the caster who
suffers the effect of the spell. Simply knowing this causes many
mages to shy away from attempting such powerful magic.
Far Walk
Skill: Conjuration
Arcane Knowledge: dimension
Difficulty: 17
Effect: 26 (astral projection of 4D+1)
Range: Self (+0)
Speed: Instantaneous (+0)
Duration: 1 hour (+18)
Casting Time: 1 round (-4)
Other Aspects:
Concentration (-2): 1 round with willpower/mettle difficulty of 8
Feedback (-1): -1 to damage resistance total
Focused (+8): On caster
By sending her consciousness through the folds of inter-
dimensional space, the caster can visit other locations by
leaving her body behind. This spell grants the caster 4D+1 in
the Psionics: astral projection skill (detailed in the “Psionics”
chapter of the D6 Adventure Rulebook).
Folded Space
Skill: Conjuration
Arcane Knowledge: dimension
Difficulty: 18
Effect: 15 (1,000 kilograms)
Range: Touch (+0)
Speed: Instantaneous (+0)
Duration: 1 week (+29)
Casting Time: 1 minute (-9)
Other Aspects:
Components (-2): Small chest or bag (very common)
Concentration (-3): Every 24 hours, spend 1 round in concentration with willpower/mettle difficulty of 8 to maintain the spell
Focused (+8): On container
A chest or bag with this spell cast upon it can hold up
to 1,000 kilograms of mass. The weight of the container is
not increased, as the objects drop into a fold within inter-
dimensional space. However, it is not possible to sustain
living creatures within this area for more than a few minutes.
Nonetheless, it provides plenty of space for carrying items.
Note that any thing that is larger than the opening of the
container cannot be placed inside. This means an automobile
could not be shoved into a paper lunch bag, but 1,000 kilo-
grams of marbles or appropriately sized items do fit.
Greater Telekinesis
Skill: Apportation
Arcane Knowledge: inanimate forces
Difficulty: 27
Effect: 36 (telekinesis of 6D)
Range: 1 meter (+0)
Speed: Instantaneous (+0)
Duration: 1 hour (+18)
Casting Time: 1 minute (-9)
Other Aspects:
Concentration (-2): 1 round with willpower/mettle difficulty of 8
Focused (+10): On target
Successfully casting this spell imbues the target with the
Psionics skill telekinesis at 6D. The target is can move objects
with the power of her mind. All the rules for the skill use
apply as dictated in the D6 Adventure Rulebook chapter on
“Psionics.” The distance moved and weight of an object moved
is indicated on the “Telekinesis” table. The “Psionics Range”
table governs the range of the telekinesis skill.
Increase Gravity
Skill: Alteration
Arcane Knowledge: inanimate forces
Difficulty: 34
Effect: 30 (Hindrance: High Gravity (R10), +5 to acrobat- ics, brawling/fighting, lifting/lift, melee combat, running,  and throwing difficulties)
Range: 15 meters (+6)
Speed: Instantaneous (+6)
Duration: 1 minute (+9)
Casting Time: 2 rounds (-5)
Other Aspects:
Area Effect (+25): Sphere with radius of 5 meters
Concentration (-2): 2 rounds of concentration with willpower/mettle difficulty of of 8
Gestures (-1): Clench fist and point (simple)
Incantations (-1): “Heavy.” (phrase)
The caster increases gravity for a 10-meter wide area.
Because of this, certain physical actions get difficulty modi-
fiers (see the “effect” description for details).
As this is a magical adjustment in gravity, it does not affect
victims in exactly the same way as a normal loss of gravity.
Furthmore, anyone or anything leaving the area of effect
loses any modifiers given by the spell.
Lesser Telekinesis
Skill: Apportation
Arcane Knowledge: inanimate forces
Difficulty: 14
Effect: 18 (telekinesis of 3D)
Range: 1 meter (+0)
Speed: Instantaneous (+0)
Duration: 25 minutes (+16)
Casting Time: 1 round (-4)
Other Aspects:
Concentration (-2): 1 round with willpower/mettle difficulty of 8
Focused (+6): On target
The target can move objects with the power her mind with
the successful casting of this spell. The “Psionics” chapter in
the D6 Adventure Rulebook describes the game mechanics of
this spell. The distance moved and weight of an object moved
is indicated on the “Telekinesis” table. The “Psionics Range”
table governs the range of the telekinesis skill.
Locate Person
Skill: Divination
Arcane Knowledge: dimension, folk
Difficulty: 14
Effect: 6 (search of 2D)
Range: 10 kilometers (+20)
Speed: Instantaneous (+20)
Duration: 1 minute (+4)
Casting Time: 1 hour (-18)
Other Aspects:
Components (-5): Personal belonging from target (very rare)
Concentration (-2): 3 rounds with willpower/mettle difficulty of 8
Gestures (-2): Form goggles with hands over eyes (fairly simple)
Variable Movement (+5): Bending/unseen target
If all the conditions are satisfied, then it is possible for
the caster to locate a given person within a 10-kilometer
range. Compare the result points of the spell’s search versus
the target’s Agility/Reflexes or sneak/stealth to the following
table to find how much the mage knows.
Minimal (0 or less): general direction is determined
Solid (1–4): direction and an idea of distance are known
Good (5–8): direction, rough distance, and general features
of the location are discerned
Superior (9 or more): direction, exact distance, and the
exact location are garnered
Rend Reality
Skill: Conjuration
Arcane Knowledge: dimension
Difficulty: 29
Effect: 30 (10D physical damage)
Range: 25 meters (+7)
Speed: Instantaneous (+7)
Duration: 1 minute (+9)
Casting Time: 1 round (-4)
Other Aspects:
Area Effect (+15): Sphere with radius of 3 meters
Components (-2): 2 small magnets (very common)
Concentration (-2): 1 round with willpower/mettle difficulty of 8
Gestures (-2): Tearing motion with hands while holding magnets (fairly simple)
After casting this powerful spell, the fabric of reality is
torn asunder, leaving a gapping tear that is jet black. This is
the space between spaces, an utter void. All who are within
the area effect of this spell must make an opposed Physique/
Strength o r  lifting/lift roll against the spell skill total (no other
targeting roll is needed). Failure results in being pulled inside.
Those who lose all of their Body Points or Wounds from the
damage caused by the rift are lost forever; it is impossible to
pull an object or a person from this temporarily disrupted
section of the universe. Anyone surviving the devestation
is found after the spell wears off, battered, on the ground
where the tear once was.
((( insert illo s4-3 rend reality)))
Secret Passage
Skill: Apportation
Arcane Knowledge: dimension
Difficulty: 10
Effect: 16 (move up to 150 kilograms per round 10 meters away)
Range: 1 meter (+0)
Speed: Instantaneous (+0)
Duration: 1 minute (+9)
Casting Time: 1 round (-4)
Other Aspects:
Gestures (-1): Outline circle in the air (simple)
Casting secret passage opens an interdimensional gateway
with an opening within one meter of the caster and an exit
10 meters away. The exit portal connects as though a straight
line were drawn from one point to another. This allows pas-
sage through 10 meters of any material, including air, water,
rock, and so on. All who enter vanish from sight and instantly
appear at the exit point.
Send Whisper
Skill: Conjuration
Arcane Knowledge: dimension
Difficulty: 12
Effect: 0
Range: 1 kilometer (+15)
Speed: Instantaneous (+15)
Duration: 2 rounds (+5)
Casting Time: 2 rounds (-5)
Other Aspects:
Concentration (-2): 1 round with willpower/mettle difficulty of 8
Gestures (-1): Make a cone with hands around mouth (simple)
Incantations (-2): Whisper target’s name along with the desired message (complex; languages/speaking roll with difficulty of 11)
Other Conditions (-2): Must have known the target for at least 1 week; must speak target’s language
Only the target can hear the caster’s words if the spell
is successful. The communication is one-way, coming from
the caster. But because the message is traveling through
the barrier between planes, voices often become distorted,
making sending a message much more difficult than normal
conversation. For this reason, the magic user must make a
languages/speaking attempt in a language the caster speaks
and the target understands. The distortion creating by sending
a dimensional message creates a difficulty of 11. If the skill
roll succeeds, the message is automatically heard. If a one is
rolled on the Wild Die, but the difficulty number is equaled
or passed, then others within one-meter of the target can
hear the message as well.
The message is limited to what the caster can say in 10
seconds.
(((begin sidebar — may be placed anywhere in peregrination
section)))
Transgressing Boundaries
While no one is particularly sure where this book
originated, it has been duplicated many times over.
Some of the copies have translation mistakes, while
others are completely erroneous. Being reproduced so
many times makes it unlikely that a player’s character
can encounter an original.
As the tome has survived over countless centuries,
and seen existence on countless planes, it is not surpris-
ing that once electronic editions came into being, the
title became well known, but the integrity decreased.
Nonetheless, discerning a fake requires a forgery roll
of 13. If a hero possesses a forged edition but believes
it to be authentic, then it likely that some of the spells
have been intentionally corrupted. The number of the
corrupted spells is left to the gamemaster to determine.
The possibility of owning a “fake” copy is not a secret to
those who have heard of the volume. Most are willing
to take the risk.
The gamemaster must decide upon the physical form
the text takes, based upon her game setting. It certainly
can range from handwritten to a digital edition.
Contents: Most every version of Transgressing
Boundaries has detailed information about the arcane
knowledge dimensions. If it is allowed, a player’s charac-
ter can improve or gain knowledge in this area, provided
the proper reading period is dedicated to the volume.
(The player must also spend the requisite Character
Points for obtaining a Special Ability.)
Also contained in the text are the following spells:
secret passage, locate person, vanish, shift plane, beacon
and possibly others.
Protections: Some electronic editions contain a
virus that imparts a Hindrance on the user’s com -
puter skills (Hindrance (R4), +3 to all computer-using
actions).
Language: Because the text has been translated
myriad times, by numerous species spanning multiple
planes, it is likely that the tome is available in nearly
any language.
Reading Period: The reader needs eight months to
fully study the material. While partial study provides
general information about the topic, a complete and
thorough reading is necessary to gain the Arcane
Knowledge Special Ability. Additionally, until the full
study period has passed, all attempts to cast a spell
from the text fail. For every two months of study, an
Easy investigation is required. Succeeding at the roll
indicates that the past two months were meaningful.
Failure means that the person must reread portions
and is delayed by two months.
After a total of eight successful month have been
acquired, the reader fully comprehends the text.
(((end sidebar)))
Shift Plane
Skill: Apportation
Arcane Knowledge: dimension
Difficulty: 31
Effect: 63 (600 kilograms of matter moved to another dimen- sion with a planar distance value of 49 or less)
Range: Self (+0)
Speed: Instantaneous (+0)
Duration: 1 round (+4)
Casting Time: 1 hour (-18)
Other Aspects:
Area Effect (+25): Sphere with radius of 5 meters
Concentration (-5): 10 minutes with willpower/mettle difficulty of 11
Gestures (-1): Touch the ground upon the completion of the spell (simple)
Incantations (-1): “Shift.” (phrase)
Other Conditions (-6): Must be knowledgeable of the target dimension, which requires a scholar roll of 20
Up to 600 kilograms of targets within the spell’s radius
are transported to a given dimension. As this spell uses an
area effect, the caster may not choose the targets going
with him.
Synchronicity
Skill: Apportation
Arcane Knowledge: dimension
Difficulty: 13
Effect: 4 (5 kilograms)
Range: 100 meters (+10)
Speed: Instantaneous (+10)
Duration: 5 rounds (+6)
Casting Time: 1 round (-4)
Other Aspects:
Concentration (-2): 1 round with willpower/mettle difficulty of 8
Focused (+2): On target
Gestures (-1): Grasp at air (simple)
Incantations (-2): Whisper, “I touch something from afar.” (sentence)
Variable Movement (+5): Bending/unseen target
Other Conditions (-2): Must make a scholar roll at 11, indicating she has sufficient understanding of dimensions
Many occultists and scholars of magic believe that there
is no such thing as coincidence. Instead, seemingly random
events are attributed to interference from other dimensions,
or an object coming out of a dimension and then re-entering
the same dimension at another location. That is to say, if the
top of a horseshoe where to be pushed through a sheet of
paper to the point that only the open ends were visible, those
unfamiliar with the shape of the horseshoe would see two,
separate items poking through the paper. But to those who
understand the shape of a horseshoe, it is known that both
visible parts are connected by an unseen bend. This is how
synchronicity works. It allows the caster to perform an action,
but that action is linked through a multi-dimensional conduit
that causes a similar action to occur at a distance.
After completing the spell, the magic user’s physical actions
are invisibly replicated at a spot of her choosing up to 100
meters away. Once the location is designated, it cannot be
altered. For instance, the mage may decide that when she
waves her hands, the glassware in a shop 50 meters away
would suddenly clatter to the floor, though it would not
break as this spell causes no damage.
The exact results are left to the gamemaster and the circum-
stances, but the caster should be allowed to be as creative as
possible. (However, this spell cannot cause injury — though
perhaps a little pain, such as a tug on the ear — and can
only affect up to five kilograms of matter.) Because of this
unique ability, this spell is often used to distract others for
a brief moment.
Unseen Bullet
Skill: Apportation
Arcane Knowledge: dimension
Difficulty: 15
Effect: 0 (1 kilogram projectile)
Range: 150 meters (+11)
Speed: Instantaneous (+11)
Duration: 1 minute (+9)
Casting Time: 1 round (-4)
Other Aspects:
Components (-1): physical projectile of any sort, be it rock, arrow, bullet, etc. (ordinary)
Concentration (-2): 1 round with willpower/mettle difficulty of 8
Focused (+1): On projectile
Gestures (-1): Grasp projectile in hand (simple)
Variable Movement (+5): Bending with +4D (+12) to targeting skill total
Without the ability to see or sense the target, such as
through other magic, this spell is not very useful. If a victim
can be located, then the projectile can be thrown or fired
with a +4D (+12) to the targeting skill total. The object hits
the target on a successful skill roll as though appearing from
no where. There is no possibility to dodge or take cover, as
projectile travels through a wormhole, unhindered by all
physical barriers. This means it is possible to shoot through
one or more windows without breaking the glass.
Vanish
Skill: Apportation
Arcane Knowledge: dimension
Difficulty: 15
Effect: 21 (Invisibility (R3), +3 to dodge, sneak/stealth, and hide: self totals and +3 to search, tracking, investigation, and attack difficulties against target; Iron Will (R3), +3D to will- power/mettle rolls and +6 to default interaction attempts and mental attacks against character; Natural Armor: In Other Dimension (R3), +3D to damage resistance roll against physi- cal and energy attacks)
Range: Touch (+0)
Speed: Instantaneous (+0)
Duration: 1 hour (+18)
Casting Time: 2 rounds (-5)
Other Aspects:
Concentration (-2): 1 round with willpower/mettle difficulty of 8
Other Conditions (-2): Anything that affects other dimensional creatures affects the target
Any living or nonliving item up to 150 kilograms can be
folded into a small, temporary dimension created by the
caster. By all appearances, the object or person simply van-
ishes from sight. Time passes normally for the duration of
the spell; the target can do whatever she wishes, as long as
she does not move from the spot where she vanished. There
is always enough air to breath for at least one hour. The
atmosphere must be present at the location where the spell
is cast; it cannot be created by the magic user.
Void Shield
Skill: Conjuration
Arcane Knowledge: dimension
Difficulty: 29
Effect:  23 (5D physical damage, ignores nonmagical armor)
Range: 25 meters (+7)
Speed: Instantaneous (+7)
Duration: 5 rounds (+7)
Casting Time: 1 round (-4)
Other Aspects:
Change Target (+25): up to 5 times (once per round or when attacked)
Gestures (-2): draw circle in the air (simple)
Other Conditions (-5): Willpower/mettle  roll of 14 is required each time the spell is moved; target must be alive
Casting void shield  creates a one-meter radius circle of
negative energy that causes 5D damage to up to five targets
that come in contact with it. Its name is misleading in that
it doesn’t improve Armor Value; rather, it is a weapon. While
the spell is active, the “shield” thrums, as the caster directs it
from target to target. It is only capable of causing damage to
those who possess positive energy, who are alive. It can pass
through a character, causing damage, moving to the next to
continue with another attack.
Striking at the void shield is the as being attack. The attack-
ing weapon and the attacker suffer 5D of damage, split
between them (but only one of the change targets is used
up). Nonmagical armor does not protect against the damage
caused by this spell.
((( insert illo s4-4 void shield)))
Vortex
Skill: Conjuration
Arcane Knowledge: dimensions
Difficulty: 34
Effect: 29 (6D+1 physical damage, ignores nonmagical armor)
Range: 40 meters (+8)
Speed: Instantaneous (+8)
Duration: 3 rounds (+6)
Casting Time: 1 round (-4)
Other Aspects:
Area Effect (+25): Sphere with radius of 5 meters
Concentration (-2): 1 round with willpower/mettle difficulty of 8
Feedback (-3): -3 to damage resistance total
Variable Movement (+1): Movement of 5 meters per round
By knowledge of the planes and will, a mage can focus
her mental energy upon a location visible to her and open
a swirling vortex. This is an interdimensional juncture that
creates havoc in nearly any plane it is created. The opening
of the shimmering vortex is announced by a deep rumbling
sound not unlike thunder. By the time the spell is completed,
all within several meters can hear and feel the roar and quake
of this unnatural creation. Any object that comes into contact
with it suffers 6D+1 damage, with no damage being absorbed
by nonmagical armor. Additionally, the caster can move the
vortex five meter per round.
Should two vortices come into contact, they cancel each
other, immediately ending the spell.

Technomancy
-----------

Activate Automaton
Skill: Conjuration
Arcane Knowledge: inanimate forces, enchanted, metal
Difficulty: 15/17
Effect: 27 ( Agility/Reflexes  and Physique/Strength of 3D each; movement equal to result points in meters round with minimum of 1 meter per round)
Range: Touch (+0)
Speed: Instantaneous (+0)
Duration: 1 day (+25)
Casting Time: 1 hour (-18)
Other Aspects:
Components (-6/-3): Robot/automaton without power source (extremely rare/common)
Focused (+10): On target
Gestures (-6): Program instructions into robot (challenging, devices/tech/robot interface/repair difficulty of 23)
Incantations (-2): “Activate!” loudly (phrase)
The game setting determines the components modifier.
In fantasy or pre-computer eras, robots are likely to be
extremely rare, while post-computer or science fiction set -
tings often have an abundance of robots. In any case, this
spell does not give life to a machine. Rather, it imbues 3D to
both Agility/Reflexes and Physique/Strength. This means that
the mechanical device is capable of ambulation (at a rate of
and physical acts such as lifting or attacking. However, to
control the device requires programming with the devices/
tech/robot interface/repair skill. Instructions cannot be called
out, as the automaton or robot has not been given the ability
to understand speech. Automatons make useful guards and
servants, and are occasionally handy in combat.
Alter Trajectory
Skill: Alteration
Arcane Knowledge: Inanimate forces, metal
Difficulty: 21
Effect: 12 (Hindrance: Altered Firearm (R4), +12 to marksmanship/firearms difficulties)
Range: 100 meters (+10)
Speed: Instantaneous (+10)
Duration: 10 minutes (+14)
Casting Time: 2 rounds (-5)
Other Aspects:
Components (-3): Small, misshapen lead ball (common)
Focused (+5): On weapon
Gestures (-1): Make spiral motion with hand (simple)
Other Conditions (-1): The target must be a ranged weapon that is manufactured of metal or has a metal component as part of its firing mechanism
With the twist of a hand, the magic user can cause a ranged
weapon to alter the interior shape of its barrel, bore, rifling and
so on. Although the imperfection created is minor, requiring
a Moderate search to detect, it is sufficient to create a +12
difficulty modifier to marksmanship/firearms.
Armor
Skill: Conjuration
Arcane Knowledge: Metal
Difficulty: 12
Effect: 6 (Armor Value of 2D, physical only)
Range: 1 meter (+0)
Speed: Instantaneous (+0)
Duration: 1 hour (+18)
Casting Time: 2.5 seconds (-2)
Other Aspects:
Components (-2): Any type of coin-sized metal: bronze, iron, and so on (very common)
Focused (+4): On coin
Incantations (-1): “Make armor!.” (phrase)
This spell allows the caster to produce the equivalent of a
breastplate and grieves from a coin-sized fragment of metal.
This not only works wonderfully when passing through
metal detectors, but just as well when entering a monarch’s
sanctuary. Regardless of the type of metal used, the armor
is similar to bronze armor in quality and protection. Once
it is conjured on a target, it cannot be removed unless the
spell duration ends or the magic user halts it. The armor is
seamless, and fits any form perfectly.
Attract Metal
Skill: Alteration
Arcane Knowledge: Magic
Difficulty: 18
Effect: 18 (Hindrance: Metal Attracts (R), -6 to damage resistance total)
Range: 10 meters (+7)
Speed: Instantaneous (+7)
Duration: 1 minute (+9)
Casting Time: 2 rounds (-5)
Other Aspects:
Components (-1): Small magnet or loadstone (ordinary)
Concentration (-2): 1 round with willpower/mettle difficulty of 8
Coutenance (-1): Target surrounded by faint red glow
Focused (+5): On target
Gestures (-1): Wave hand, welcoming something (simple)
Other Conditions (-1): Hindrance only applies to attacks made by metal weapons or spells using metal
If the mage successfully casts this spell, then the victim
attracts metal weapons, increasing their damage by pulling
them toward the character. The spell is not capable of auto-
matically causing damage; rather, it decreases the protection
offered against any melee or magical or projectile weapons
used against the target. For the duration of the spell, the
figure is surrounded by a faint red glow. The effect of this
spell is not limited to ferrous metals.
Awaken Machine
Skill: Conjuration
Arcane Knowledge: Inanimate Forces
Difficulty: 18
Effect: 18 (one combat skill of 3D; +2D physical damage)
Range: 40 meters (+8)
Speed: Instantaneous (+8)
Duration: 1 day (+25)
Casting Time: 1 hour (-18)
Other Aspects:
Components (-5): A mechanical device that has a weapon (very rare)
Concentration (-2): 1 hour with willpower/mettle difficulty of 12
Incantations (-1): “Tick! (phrase)
Other Alterants (+3): Will attack anything that moves within 3 meters of it
The spell only activates any weapon mounted upon the
machine, conveying 3D in one combat skill (chosen at cast-
ing with +2D to its weapon’s damage. The weapon used
determines the amount of damage.
Even though the device may have legs, tracks or another
form of locomotion, the spell does not cause it to move.
The contraption is incapable of thought. But, through magic
and mechanical gimmickry, once awakened, it fights with
the skill of a moderately trained warrior. Often such devices
are place in corridors for protection, or hidden beneath false
floors as a trap.
(((insert illo s7-1 awaken machine)))
Blunt
Skill: Alteration
Arcane Knowledge: Metal
Difficulty: 12
Effect: 9 (-2D physical damage modifier)
Range: 10 meters (+5)
Speed: Instantaneous (+5)
Duration: 1.5 minutes (+10)
Casting Time: 1 round (-4)
Other Aspects:
Components (-1): Stone (ordinary)
Focused (+3): On weapon
Gestures (-2): Wave stone as though hammering the edge of a weapon (simple)
Incantations (-2): “Blunt!.” (phrase, loud)
Construct Small Automaton
Skill: Divination
Arcane Knowledge: Inanimate Forces
Difficulty: 36
Effect: 52 (8D in device skill, 6D in craft skill, and 10 materials)
Range: Touch (+0)
Speed: instantaneous (+0)
Duration: 1 year (+38)
Casting Time: 1 week (-29)
Other Aspects:
Components (-7): A variety of materials are needed, ranging from the mundane to a flawless gem or some other such rare item to energize the automaton (uncommon to rare)
Focused (+18): On target
Incantations (-1): “Understand.” whispered (phrase)
The game setting determines the components needed. The
automaton is usually a mechanical contraption of limited
capability. Typically such machines do not possess the fac -
ulty of cognitive thought. Instead, they are controlled by
spells such as Activate Automaton, which allow for limited
function. However, the first step is constructing the device.
A successful casting of this spell allows for the construction
of a human sized creation. The gamemaster should have the
player’s characters follow the rules for the skill  device, and
possibly make some of the require components very difficult
to acquire — having a world populated by automatons can
be interested and dangerous.
Other Conditions (-1): Must be a metal, edged, nonmagi-
cal weapon
This spell dulls a weapons edge. When successfully cast,
the weapon has a -2D damage modifier, with a minimum
adjusted damage value for the weapon of +1D. Any blade that
is blunted to +1D becomes something akin to a metal stick.
Magic weapons are not affected by this spell.
Control Machine
Skill: Alteration
Arcane Knowledge: Inanimate forces, metal
Difficulty: 18
Effect: 18 (Skill Bonus (R6), +18 to devices/tech/robot (or computer) interface/repair  totals)
Range: Touch (+0)
Speed: Instantaneous (+0)
Duration: 1 hour (+18)
Casting Time: 4 rounds (-6)
Other Aspects:
Components (-1): Wire or similar piece of metal (ordinary)
Focused (+7): On target
Other Conditions (-1): The target must be able to touch the device or connect to it electronically
If the caster uses this spell in a setting without the elec -
tronic networks, then the machine must be within reach of
the target. A successful casting provides the target with a +18
to her devices/tech/robot (or computer) interface/repair totals.
The setting and the devices that the caster intends the target
to affect dictate the skill that gets the bonus.
Corrosive Cloud
Skill: Conjuration
Arcane Knowledge: Metal
Difficulty: 20
Effect: 15 (5D physical damage to metal, while living crea- tures lose one action if fail resistance roll)
Range: 100 meters (+10)
Speed: Instantaneous (+10)
Duration: 1 minute (+9)
Casting Time: 1 round (-4)
Other Aspects:
Area Effect (+5): Sphere with radius of 1 meter
Components (-2): Small vile of acidic liquid, such as juice from a lemon or lime (very common)
Gestures (-1): Point in direction of cloud location (simple)
Incantations (-2): Repeated phrase for duration of spell (sentence)
Casting this spell creates as green haze. All metal within it
suffers 5D of corrosive damage unless magically protected.
The cloud is so dense as to require any living creatures inside
to make a Moderate Physique/Strength o r  stamina roll. Failure
results in choking (and the targets lose their next action).
Each round the cloud remains over a metal target, it suffers
an additional 5D of damage until it is destroyed
For the duration of the spell, the caster must continue the
litany that invokes the mystical cloud.
The first step is developing the blue prints This is done
by achieving using the table for Complexity of Device in
“Example Skill Difficulties” chapter. The gamemaster must
decide upon the technological level of the culture. In most
cases, an automaton is as prototype (+10) and is from a much
higher culture (+10), resulting in a minimum +20 modifier.
With research, this modifier might be altered. Each roll takes
one month. The base difficulty for drawing up the blueprints
is Very Difficult. However, the gamemaster should count
previous failures as bonus modifiers, as the hero learns from
her mistakes.
After the blueprints have been created, the construction
commences. Now the crafting skill is used to construct the
automaton. Again, the related table from the “Example
Skill Difficulties” chapter should be used. The number of
components that have been gathered, their quality and the
clarity of the blueprints determine the modifiers used for
constructing an automaton. The base difficulty is Very Dif -
ficult. Each attempt to construct the device takes 2 months.
The gamemaster should consider previous failures as bonus
modifiers for future attempts.
At the end of the spell’s duration, the skills are lost, but the
knowledge is not. If the attempt to build an automaton was
not successful, then the gamemaster should apply bonuses
for the next attempt for gained experience.
Construct Tremendous
Automaton
Skill: Divination
Arcane Knowledge: Inanimate Forces
Difficulty: 40
Effect: 64 (8D in device skill, 6D in craft skill, and 22 materials)
Range: Touch (+0)
Speed: instantaneous (+0)
Duration: 2 year (+39)
Casting Time: 1 week (-29)
Other Aspects:
Components (-7): A variety of materials are needed, ranging from the mundane to a flawless gem or some other such rare item to energize the automaton (uncommon to rare)
Focused (+20): On target
Incantations (-1): “Understand.” whispered (phrase)
Other Conditions (-6): Large quantities and cumbersome materials, tools and devices are needed, as well as funding; additionally, a large location is needed to construct monstrous creation
This spell work identically to Construct Small Automaton See
that spell for specifics. Note the differences are in size, casting
difficulty and duration. Blueprint design and construction
times are doubled. Otherwise, all other aspects apply.
Discern Alloy
Skill: Divination
Arcane Knowledge: Metal
Difficulty: 12
Effect: 24 (Skill Bonus (R8), +24 to investigation totals for purposes of determining metal)
Range: Self (+0)
Speed: Instantaneous (+0)
Duration: 1 round (+4)
Casting Time: 1 round (-4)
Other Aspects:
Gestures (-1): Move hands across the object (simple)
Even if the caster has no knowledge of various metals and
alloys, this spell allows her to perceive what was used to make
a given object. This is useful when encountering strange alien
objects or when attempting to see how strong a weapon, door,
or similar item is. Upon successfully casting discern alloy, the
magic user gains a +24 bonus to her investigation totals in
order to figure out the type of metal used. The difficulty is
determined by the gamemaster.
((( insert illo s7-2 EMP)))
EMP
Skill: Conjuration
Arcane Knowledge: Inanimate Forces
Difficulty: 35
Effect: 30 (10D physical damage)
Range: 100 meters (+10)
Speed: Instantaneous (+10)
Duration: 1 round (+4)
Casting Time: 1 round (-4)
Other Aspects:
Area Effect (+25): Sphere with 5 meter radius
Components (-1): Small magnet or loadstone (ordinary)
Incantations (-2): “Pulse!” (phrase, loud)
Other conditions (-2): Only affects electrical devices
Any electronic equipment in the area effect of this spell
suffers 10D damage from an electro-magnetic pulse. As this
effect is caused by altering the inanimate forces of nature,
instead of exploding a bomb, there is no damage done to most
living beings or to devices that do not have electronics.
Forge Perfect Weapon
Skill: Alteration
Arcane Knowledge: Metal
Difficulty: 16
Effect: 30 (Skill Bonus (R10), +30 crafting/repair/personal equipment repair totals)
Range: 1 meter (+0)
Speed: Instantaneous (+0)
Duration: 1 day (+25)
Casting Time: 1 hour (-18)
Other Aspects:
Components (-7): Raw material for weapon (common); forging tools and forge (uncommon)
Concentration (-6): Form image of complete weapon in mind for 1 hour with willpower/mettle difficulty of 12
Focused (+11): On target
Gestures (-1): Touch raw material with small hammer (simple)
Incantations (-1): “Flawless.” (phrase)
Other Conditions (-1): Must possess some experience in the affected skill
To gain the bonus from a successful casting of this spell,
the target must have some training in crafting/repair/personal
equipment repair; otherwise, the magical knowledge is lost.
In order for a perfect weapon to be properly crafted, not
only are the raw materials, forge, and ancillary equipment
needed, but a crafting/repair/personal equipment repair  roll
with a difficulty of Heroic is required to forge the item. The
gamemaster may use the result points from the forging skill
roll to give bonuses to the superior pieces of equipment.
Hone Edge
Skill: Alteration
Arcane Knowledge: Metal
Difficulty: 15
Effect: 12 (+2D+2 physical damage modifier)
Range: 10 meters (+5)
Speed: Instantaneous (+5)
Duration: 1 hour (+18)
Casting Time: 3 rounds (-6)
Other Aspects:
Components (-3): Whetstone (common)
Countenance (-1): Weapon gains faint blue shine
Focused (+6): On weapon
Gestures (-2): Move whetstone as though sharpening a weapon (fairly simple)
Incantations (-3): “I whet your blunt purpose!” (sentence, loud)
Other Conditions (-1): Only works on a nonmagical, metal, edged weapon
This spell places a magically keen edge upon a weapon,
increasing its damage by +2D+2. Any weapon with this spell
cast upon it gains a faint blue shine to its surface, as the
magic reshapes the metal to the molecular level, honing the
blade’s edge to that of a single atom. For the duration of this
spell, there is no material that cannot be cut or damaged by
the magical edge, even though normal or magical protection
might hinder damage.
Locate Metal
Skill: Divination
Arcane Knowledge: Metal
Difficulty: 18
Effect: 12 (search of 4D to detect a single type of metal)
Range: 40 meters (+8)
Speed: Instantaneous (+8)
Duration: 1 minute (+9)
Casting Time: 1 minute (-9)
Other Aspects:
Area Effect (+9): Divination sphere with radius of 3.5 meters
Component (-1): Forked stick (ordinary)
Concentration (-4): 1 minute with willpower/mettle of 10
Incantations (-1): Name of the metal (phrase)
Variable Movement (+5): Bending/unseen target
Once the metal is named, the spell is complete. Immediately,
the mage can roll search at 4D to locate the prescribed metal
inside an item, the earth, or a living being. Sometimes this
spell is used to locate trace amounts of a particular metal,
such as mercury or uranium. If there is anything of interest
in the indicated area, a luminous yellow glow surrounds the
location of the metal for up to one minute. The brilliance is
determined by the quantity or density of the metal in searched
for. The higher the search total is above the difficulty, the more
information the caster gleans from her  attempt, including
location, depth, quantity, etc. The gamemaster decides on the
difficulty, which depends on how well hidden the material is
and how much is there.
Machine Terror
Skill: Conjuration
Arcane Knowledge: Enchanted
Difficulty: 28
Effect: 25 (intimidation of 8D+1)
Range: 100 meters (+10)
Speed: Instantaneous (+10)
Duration: 10 minutes (+14)
Casting Time: 1 minute (-9)
Other Aspects:
Components (-1): Metal shards (ordinary)
Focused (+7): On machine
Gestures (-1): Point at target (simple)
Regardless of the type of contraption, the spell make a
machine capable of stimulating terror in anyone within sight
of the device. Anyone who fails an opposed interaction roll
against the machine’s intimdation loses her next action. The
machine terrorizes once per round for the duration of the
spell. This is a way of making a trap, automaton, robot, and
so on appear far more frightening than it may actually be.
((( insert illo s7-3 magic platter)))
Magic Platter
Skill: Apportation
Arcane Knowledge: Inanimate Forces
Difficulty: 15
Effect: 10 (moves up to 100 kilograms)
Range: 1 meter (+0)
Speed: Instantaneous (+0)
Duration: 1 week (+29)
Casting Time: 1 minute (-18)
Other Aspects:
Area Effect (+2): Circle with radius of 1 meter
Components (-1): Small piece of metal or coin (ordinary)
Focused (+7): On metal
Gestures (-1): Point (simple)
Incantations (-1): “Carry.” (phrase)
Variable Movement (+3): Movement of 12.5 meters per round
The caster transforms a coin into a floating platter capable
of carrying 100 kilograms of weight. To direct it, all that needs
to be done is to point. If the magic user indicates herself, then
the tray follows her. Otherwise, she must guide it. Providing
a character is 100 kilograms or less, it is possible for her to
ride or be carried by the platter.
Magnetism
Skill: Conjuration
Arcane Knowledge: Inanimate Forces
Difficulty: 28
Effect: 20 (difficulty to resist the pull)
Range: Touch (+0)
Speed: Instantaneous (+0)
Duration: 5 rounds (+7)
Casting Time: 1 round (-4)
Other Aspects:
Area Effect (+25): Sphere with radius of 5 meters
Components (-1): Small magnet or loadstone (ordinary)
Focused (+5): On magnet
Gestures (-3): Throw loadstone (complex; throwing roll with difficulty of 11)
Incantations (-1): “Pull!.” (phrase, loud)
Other Alterants (+8): Metal objects move toward magnet at rate of 1 meter per round; mechanical devices within spell’s influence stop working for duration of spell
Once cast, this spell is not very discerning: All ferrous
objects within its radius are pulled toward the loadstone. The
magic user throws the stone in a direction that works best
against any enemy, making sure to stay clear herself. Anyone
wearing metal must make a Physique/Strength or lifting/lift
against the effect’s difficulty. Failure means the affected object
is yanked free and pulled toward the loadstone at a speed of
one meter per round. If ferrous armor is being worn, then the
character wearing the armor moves as well. (Non-character
objects automatically move toward the stone.)
Another effect this spell has is to cause all mechanical
devices with metals influenced by magnetism to stop func-
tioning, as well as being pulled toward the loadstone.
(((begin sidebar — may be placed anywhere in technomancy
section)))
De Magnete
Written by Silas Copi, a philosopher of natural and
unnatural laws, De Magnete spans 400 pages. It is a col-
lection of folklore and histories as much as an original
work. Much of its contents are likely to have existed
throughout human history in many forms. Copi himself
discusses one source, Earthly Bodies, that served as the
basis of his fundamental research.
De Magnete was published in the 1600s, and Copi
gives no date for his primary sources. Copi’s edition of
De Magnete is often mistaken with a similar work by an
English author named William Gilbert. Some histori-
ans have speculated that there might be a connection
between the two works, and that Gilbert published a
second version of his text covertly to avoid royal cen-
sors and papal punishment.
Contents: In addition to numerous other spells hid-
den throughout the document, the basic spells include:
alter traject ory, awaken machine, blunt, malfunction,
metal storm, and molting metal.
Protections: None.
Language: The tome is written in a common lan -
guage of the gamemasters’s choosing. However, it does
require the reader be skilled in the Extranormal art of
Magic. With prolonged study, such a success allows the
reader to understand the nature of the text.
Reading Period: It takes two months to read and
comprehend the book. Each month, a successful Dif -
ficult skill roll in any of the Magic skills is required to
decipher the script, symbols, and arcane terminology.
After studying the tome, it is possible to start learning
the spells at a rate of one per day.
(((end sidebar)))
Make Statue
Skill: Alteration
Arcane Knowledge: Metal
Difficulty: 27
Effect:  54 (12D physical damage, ignores nonmagical armor)
Range: 5 meters (+4)
Speed: Instantaneous (+4)
Duration: 1 second (+0)
Casting Time: 1 round (-4)
Other Aspects:
Components (-4): Iron statue (uncommon)
Gestures (-1): Point at target with statue (simple)
Incantations (-2): “Statue!.” (phrase, loud)
Other Alterant (+3): Target turns into a statue if she dies
A mage who successfully casts this spell and makes the
necessary targeting roll causes 12D damage that nonmagi -
cal armor offers no protection against. The spell alters the
composition of the target, attempting to refigure her into
an iron statue. If the damage is sufficient to cause death,
then she becomes a statue. This is permanent damage. The
character cannot be resurrected, as there is no living material
to bring back to life. Instead, she has become an ornament
for someone’s garden or great hall.
Malfunction
Skill: Conjuration
Arcane Knowledge: Inanimate Forces
Difficulty: 14
Effect: 18 (6D damage against machines)
Range: 60 meters (+9)
Speed: Instantaneous (+9)
Duration: 1 second (+0)
Casting Time: 2.5 seconds (-2)
Other Aspects:
Components (-2): Small iron ball (common)
Gestures (-2): Throw component in direction of target (fairly simple)
Incantations (-2): “Stop!” loudly (phrase)
Other Conditions (-1): Only harms mechanical devices
Sometimes it is best to fight metal with metal. When cast,
this spell sends a searing bolt of energy at the target, doing
6D damage. This spell has only works against machines, as it
uses the same forces of physics (and sometimes magic) that
produced the construct to destroy it. No harm comes to a
living, undead, or any other creature that is not mechanical
in nature. Certainly robots are affected by this spell, as are
cyborgs. However, only the mechanical parts of a cyborg are
damaged; the living flesh is unharmed.
Malleable
Skill: Alteration
Arcane Knowledge: Metal
Difficulty: 17
Effect: 25 (Compare to item’s Toughness or damage resistance)
Range: 60 meters (+9)
Speed: Instantaneous (+9)
Duration: 1 round (+4)
Casting Time: 2 rounds (-5)
Other Aspects:
Components (-2): Malleable clay (very common)
Concentration (-2): 2 rounds with willpower/mettle difficulty of 8
Gestures (-2): Shape the clay (fairly simple)
Incantations (-1): “Alter.” (phrase)
Other Conditions (-1): The target must be nonmagical, metal, and no more than 5 kilograms
Any targeted metal object that has a mass of five kilograms
or less can be permanently altered in shape. For instance, the
caster could transform a shield into a ball, thereby negating
its protection. Or, the length of a metal rod could be extended
to twice its length, although doing this makes it very thin.
Just as easily could the barrel of a gun be twisted closed.
Basically, whatever shape the magic user makes with the clay
component is paralleled with the target. (The player speci -
fies the target and the shape, and the gamemaster compares
the effect’s value plus the casting’s result point bonus to the
object’s Toughness or damage resistance to determine whether
the object takes the new shape.) Magically imbued metal or
magically protected metal cannot be altered.
Man of Bronze
Skill: Conjuration
Arcane Knowledge: Folk, metal
Difficulty: 19
Effect: 27 (Natural Armor: Bronze Skin (R2), +2D Armor Value; +2D to charm/persuasion)
Range: 1 meter (+0)
Speed: Instantaneous (+0)
Duration: 1 hour (+18)
Casting Time: 1 minute (-9)
Other Aspects:
Components (-4): Powdered bronze (uncommon, destroyed)
Focused (+9): On target
Gestures (-1): Sprinkle powdered bronze over target (simple)
Other Conditions (-2): Deteriorates when exposed to moisture
Though bronze can be a fairly precious commodity, the
value of this spell is well worth the expense. After simply
sprinkling a handful of powdered bronze over a sentient
target, the mage coats that individual’s skin in a thin layer
of bronze that doesn’t hamper movement. It’s a strong as
the actual metal, offering an Armor Value of 2D against all
types of physical (not mental) attacks. In addition, because
of its rich, attractive coloration, the bronzed skin provides
a charm/persuasion skill bonus of +2D. The spell lasts for one
hour, expect in moist environments where a greenish patina
quickly forms and causes the spell to deteriorate rapidly.
In humid or damp environments (jungles or dungeons, for
example), the spell deteriorates at a rate of five minutes for
every one minute of exposure. In water, the rate is 10 minutes
per minute of exposure.
Metal Claws
Skill: Conjuration
Arcane Knowledge: Metal
Difficulty: 12/18 (one claw/two claws)
Effect: 12 (Natural Hand-to-Hand Weapon: Claws (R2), +2D damage)
Range: 1 meter (+0)
Speed: Instantaneous (+0)
Duration: 1 hour (+18)
Casting Time: 1 round (-4)
Other Aspects:
Components (-2): Two of any type of coin-sized metal: bronze, iron, and so on (very common)
Focused (+6): On target
Incantations (-2): “Grow claws!.” (phrase, loud)
Other Conditions (-1): Target must hold coins in each hand
Once cast, three metal blades extend from each hand of the
target. As these weapons are natural extensions of the char-
acter, she uses brawling to fight with them. Each confers +2D
damage to an attack. Normal armor protection applies.
Although they are not cumbersome, the claws do tend to
stand out in a crowd.
Metal Flesh
Skill: Conjuration
Arcane Knowledge: Metal
Difficulty: 16
Effect: 24 (Armor Value of 8D, physical only)
Range: 1 meter (+0)
Speed: Instantaneous (+0)
Duration: 25 minutes (+16)
Casting Time: 1 minute (-9)
Other Aspects:
Components (-2): Iron slug (very common)
Countenance (-2): Target appears metallic
Focused (+8): On target
Incantations (-2): “I give you flesh of metal.” (sentence)
Other Conditions (-1): Cannot be combined with any other armor
This highly coveted spell transforms fleshy skin into a
nearly impenetrable metal husk. It protects against normal
and magical attacks. As the transmuted skin is as malleable
as human flesh, at least to the target, there are no penalties
from this spell. However, it is not easily disguised as any
character who has had metal flesh cast upon her is shiny and
rings if tapped with any solid object.
It cannot be combined with any other armor, and the
target cannot wear any form of metal armor when the spell
is cast.
Metal Storm
Skill: Alteration
Arcane Knowledge: Inanimate forces
Difficulty: 29
Effect: 20 (6D+2 physical damage)
Range: 60 meters (+9)
Speed: Instantaneous (+9)
Duration: 1 round (+4)
Casting Time: 1 round (-4)
Other Aspects:
Area Effect (+25): Sphere with radius of 5 meters
Components (-3): A bag of tiny iron or lead pellets (common)
Gestures (-2): Pour pellets into hand and toss into the air (fairly simple)
A rain of metal pellets bombards everyone in the designated
five-meter radius. The storm of metal is overwhelming, caus-
ing 6D+2 damage to all within the downpour. Normal and
magical armor offer protection, but the sheer volume of pro-
jectiles, and their velocity, is likely to cause severe injury.
((( insert illo s7-4 metal storm)))
Molten Metal
Skill: Alteration
Arcane Knowledge: Metal, inanimate forces
Difficulty: 11
Effect: 9 (Achilles’ Heel (R3), takes 1D in damage each round in contact with metal, increasing by 1D each round)
Range: 10 meters (+5)
Speed: Instantaneous (+5)
Duration: 5 rounds (+7)
Casting Time: 1 round (-4)
Other Aspects:
Components (-3): Polished mirror (common)
Focused (+3): On target
Gestures (-1): Point mirror at target (simple)
This spell is slow to reach its full potential, but it is likely to
cause a combatant to stop fighting long enough to remove her
armor or drop a metal weapon. Each round the spell is active,
the target receives 1D damage, which increases by 1D.
Portcullis
Skill: Conjuration
Arcane Knowledge: Enchanted
Difficulty: 28
Effect: 45 (damage resistance total of portcullis; 5D physical damage)
Range: 3.5 meters (+3)
Speed: 1 meter per second/+2 to dodge total (+2)
Duration: 10 minute (+14)
Casting Time: 2 rounds (-5)
Other Aspects:
Area Effect (+2): Final maximum height of 3 meters and width of 1 meter
Components (-3): Metal rod (common)
Gestures (-1): Swing hand in a downward motion (simple)
Other Conditions (-1): Can only be cast in an open portal
The mage stands within a meter of an opening and projects
the spell upward. After the spell is cast, over the course of a
round, an iron portcullis comes into existence. Its eventually
spans up to three meters high and a meter wide.
Because the magical barrier is slow moving, it is possible
to be captured beneath it as it slides to the ground. Any
unfortunate character in this situation suffers 5D damage
from the portcullis each round that she is trapped beneath its
unrelenting grip. Unless the character is killed, this prevents
the portal from being completely blocked.
Once closed, the gate has a damage resistance totoal of
30.
Radiation Shield
Skill: Conjuration
Arcane Knowledge: Inanimate forces
Difficulty: 41
Effect: 36 (Attack Resistance: Radiation (R6), +6D to damage resistance roll against related attacks)
Range: 10 meters (+5)
Speed: Instantaneous (+5)
Duration: 1 minute (+9)
Casting Time: 1 round (-4)
Other Aspects:
Area Effect (+25): Sphere with radius of 5 meters
Components (-2): Small fragment of lead (very common)
Focused (+9): On target
Gestures (-1): Clasp component in a fist (simple)
This spell protects against the effects of radiation and
electro-magnetic radiation, such as from an EMP spell or
similar device. The protection is granted to all within the
five-meter sphere of influence, with corresponding protec -
tion reduced by 1D for each meter out from the cental target.
Characters gain a up to +6D to their resistance rolls against
related damage.
Rain of Rust
Skill: Conjuration
Arcane Knowledge: Metal
Difficulty: 29
Effect: 15 (5D damage to ferrous metal)
Range: 100 meters (+10)
Speed: Instantaneous (+10)
Duration: 1 minute (+9)
Casting Time: 1 round (-4)
Other Aspects:
Area Effect (+25): Sphere with radius of 5 meters
Components (-2): Small, rusting iron spike (very common)
Gestures (-1): Point in direction of rain (simple)
Incantations (-3): Repeated phrase for duration of spell (complex; willpower/mettle roll with difficulty of 11)
Other Conditions (-1): Affects ferrous metal only
The mage produces a 25-meter radius downpour of red
rain that rusts all ferrous metal. When cast, the mage simply
indicates the location of the deluge by pointing, and the area
is drenched with oxidizing water, causing 5Ddamage to all
ferrous metal in the affected area. It is possible to protect
items by wrapping them in cloth, skins, or plastic or locking
them in waterproof cases. Likewise, vehicles within the area
suffer immediate damage, starting from the outside and
working to the interior.
Repel Metal
Skill: Alteration
Arcane Knowledge: Inanimate Forces
Difficulty: 13
Effect: 10 (Armor Value of 3D+1, physical only)
Range: 10 meters (+7)
Speed: Instantaneous (+7)
Duration: 1 hour (+9)
Casting Time: 2 rounds (-5)
Other Aspects:
Components (-1): Small magnet or loadstone (ordinary)
Concentration (-2): 1 round with willpower/mettle difficulty of 8
Countenance (-1): Target surrounded by faint blue glow
Focused (+3): On target
Gestures (-1): Wave hand as though to push aside something (simple)
Other Conditions (-1): Only works against damage caused by metal
All attacks made by weapons of metal are affected by this
spell. The mage casts it upon a target, providing a 3D+1
Armor Value against any attack that uses metal to damage.
For example, this spell offers protection against the spell
metal st orm, as the projectiles are metallic. For the dura -
tion of the spell, the protected character is surrounded by
a faint blue glow. The effects of this spell are not limited to
ferrous metals.
(((illo s7-5)))
Understand Inner Workings
Skill: Divination
Arcane Knowledge: Inanimate forces
Difficulty: 22
Effect: 17 (5D+2 in appropriate skill, such as tech, devices, etc.)
Range: Touch (+0)
Speed: Instantaneous (+0)
Duration: 1 day (+25)
Casting Time: 1 round (-4)
Other Aspects:
Focused (+8): On target
Gestures (-1): Touch machine and target (simple)
Incantations (-2): “Comprehend the secrets of this machine.” (sentence)
Understanding of complex, alien, or arcane technologies
can be gained by casting this spell. (The gamemaster detemines
the difficulty of understanding the machine, with the result
points from the skill conferred by the spell used to determine
what information the character gains.) Unfortunately, this
knowledge lasts only as long as the spell endures. Once the
magic has elapsed, all comprehension of the technology
vanishes as well.
Understand Vehicle
Skill: Divination
Arcane Knowledge: Inanimate forces
Difficulty: 19
Effect: 12 (4D in appropriate skill for operating a specified vehicle)
Range: 1 meter (+0)
Speed: Instantaneous (+0)
Duration: 1 day (+25)
Casting Time: 1 round (-4)
Other Aspects:
Focused (+7): On target
Gestures (-1): Touch machine and target (simple)
Incantations (-2): “Comprehend the secrets of this vehicle.” (sentence)
A mage can grant the knowledge to pilot a vehicle at a 4D
ability with this spell. No protections or great insights are
provided, just the minimal knowledge necessary to operate
the vehicle. Should it malfunction or fail, the target does not
have the knowledge to repair the mechanical device, unless
that knowledge existed otherwise. This spell does not enhance
an existing skill; it confers a new skill.

Wizardry
--------

Alter Shape
Skill: Conjuration
Arcane Knowledge: Enchanted
Difficulty: 47
Effect: 60 (Shapeshifting (R1), form of caster’s choosing, with Restricted (R2), ability uncontrolled by target; plus up to 19 points — not ranks — of related Special Abilities, with additional ranks in a Special Ability equalling the point cost of the first rank)
Range: 1 meter (+0)
Speed: Instantaneous (+0)
Duration: 1 day (+25)
Casting Time: 1 minute (-9)
Other Aspects:
Charged (+5): 1 improved charge, memorized by caster
Components (-2): Clay and stone (very common)
Focused (+17): On target
Gestures (-2): Shape clay into rough version of desired form (fairly simple)
This spell changes the physical form of the target. For all
intentions, the character becomes the creature. However,
he maintains his disposition to friends and enemies, and
has a vague sense of identity. Additionally, while he might
not be able to directly communicate, he can understand
basic instructions, and respond with sounds, gestures, or
movements.
((( insert illo s9-1 befriend animal)))
Befriend Animal
Skill: Divination
Arcane Knowledge: Enchanted
Difficulty: 18
Effect: 18 ( animal handling  of 6D; use persuasion: animals in D6 Space)
Range: 1 meter (+0)
Speed: Instantaneous (+0)
Duration: 1 hour (+18)
Casting Time: 1 round (-4)
Other Aspects:
Components (-1): Shiny trinket (ordinary)
Focused (+7): On target
Gestures (-1): Swing or move trinket back and forth (simple)
Incantations (-1): Soothing sounds (phrase)
Sometimes a canny mage can turn a bad situation into a
good one. In this case, by using the 6D in animal handling
(persuasion: animals  in D6 Space) granted by the spell, the
character could befriend creatures, hostile or otherwise.
The spell’s target makes an opposed difficulty roll against a
creature’s willpower/mettle (or the governing attribute) plus
5. If successful, an unfriendly creature can be converted into
an ally — one that fights for the caster. Any attack against
the creature by the caster or one of her allies immediately
ends the spell.
Blur
Skill: Conjuration
Arcane Knowledge: Magic
Difficulty: 13
Effect: 9 (Blur (R1), +1 to dodge, sneak/stealth, and hide: self totals, plus +1 to default search, tracking, investigation, and attack difficulties against character)
Range: 10 meters (+5)
Speed: Instantaneous (+5)
Duration: 10 minutes (+14)
Casting Time: 1 round (-4)
Other Aspects:
Components (-2): Strip of cloth (ordinary); bit of glass (ordinary
Feedback (-3): -3 to damage resistance total
Focused (+4): On target
Gestures (-2): Polish glass with cloth (fairly simple)
Incantations (-1): “Blur.” (phrase)
By  sacrificing some of her life energy, the mage grants
a target 10 minutes of the bonus given by the Blur Special
Ability at rank 1. See the description of this Special Ability in
the “Character Options” chapter for additional details.
Change Material
Skill: Alteration
Arcane Knowledge: Magic
Difficulty: 11
Effect: 4 (5 kilograms)
Range: 1 meter (+0)
Speed: Instantaneous (+0)
Duration: 1 day (+25)
Casting Time: 1 hour (-18)
Other Aspects:
Feedback (-1): -1 to damage resistance total
Focused (+5): On target
Incantations (-2): “You will become...” followed by new material’s name (sentence)
Other Alterants (+9): Transmute to new form
Other Conditions (-1): Simple, inanimate material only
This spell allows the caster to transform one simple, non-
living substance into another simple, nonliving substance.
Lead into gold is a popular transformation. The drawback is
that the change is not permanent, but for the duration, the
item possesses the attributes and qualities of the transformed
material. How well the item mimics its new state depends
on the material’s complexity; the gamemaster uses the result
points of the spell’s skill roll to determine how successful
the transformation was. When the spell ends, it reverts to
the original state.
Up to five kilograms of material can be altered by this
spell. It will pass most — if not all — tests appropriate for
its new state. However, if a spell that detects magic is per -
formed, the new material reveals that unnatural forces are
acting upon it.
Changed matter can be used as spell components providing
they are used within the spell’s duration. Nontheless, there
is an increased risk of spell failure. When using transformed
material, a Critical Failure always indicates that something
went wrong wtih the spell.
Deadeye
Skill: Alteration
Arcane Knowledge: Magic
Difficulty: 14
Effect: 27 (Skill Bonus (R9), +27 to marksmanship/firearms totals)
Range: 1 meter (+0)
Speed: Instantaneous (+0)
Duration: 2 rounds (+5)
Casting Time: 1 round (-4)
Other Aspects:
Incantations (-1): “Aim.” (phrase)
If a caster successfully casts this spell, she can temporarily
increase a target’s marksmanship/firearms skill by +27. While
this has no direct effect on damage, it provides for highly
accurate ranged weapon attacks, and it can be combined
with other modifiers. The spell is ideally used for snipers or
assassination attempts but can serve on any occasion when
the need for a precise shot is required.
Deafen
Skill: Conjuration
Arcane Knowledge: Magic
Difficulty: 36
Effect: 27 (Hindrance: Deafness (R9), +6 to difficulties of all hearing-dependent actions)
Range: 40 meters (+8)
Speed: Instantaneous (+8)
Duration: 1 minute (+9)
Casting Time: 1 round (-4)
Other Aspects:
Area Effect (+20): Sphere with radius of 4 meters
Components (-3): Small chime or bell (common)
Focused (+7): On targets
Gestures (-1): Ring chime or bell (simple)
When the caster rings a small bell, a loud noise can be
heard, deafening all in the designated area of effect. This
is likely to hinder all actions, as the inability to hear is not
only startling but unsettling. All hearing-based actions are
performed with a +6 difficulty modifier. Nothing can be heard
while affected by the spell.
((( insert illo s9-2 deafen)))
Detect Presence
Skill: Divination
Arcane Knowledge: Magic
Difficulty: 26
Effect: 18 (search of 6D to locate living beings)
Range: 5 meters (+4)
Speed: Instantaneous (+4)
Duration: 1 hour (+18)
Casting Time: 2 round (-5)
Other Aspects:
Focused (+7): On caster
Incantations (-1): “See all.” (phrase)
Variable Movement (+5): Bending/unseen target
Other Alterant (+1): Reveal cyborgs
This spell can locate someone who is hiding. The spell
confers 6D search dedicated to finding living entities only.
The difficulty is determined by either the target’s (or targets’)
hide total or the gamemaster. A success causes the located
subject to glow in a faint blue light, only visible to the caster.
The mage can look in a different direction once per round.
Besides hunting down people secreted away in a dark
room, it is also possible to determine the difference between
a human and a cyborg. In situations where cyborgs appear
human, they glow, revealing their nonliving nature.
Distract
Skill: Alteration
Arcane Knowledge: Magic
Difficulty: 22
Effect: 18 (persuasion of 6D)
Range: 5 meters (+4)
Speed: Instantaneous (+4)
Duration: 1 day (+25)
Casting Time: 1 round (-4)
Other Aspects:
Components (-1): Shiny trinket (ordinary)
Focused (+8): On target
Gestures (-1): Display the trinket while saying incantation (simple)
Incantations (-2): Simple instruction (sentence)
Unreal Effect (-5): Disbelief difficulty of 13
This spell allows a magic user to distract a target, making
that character believe there are other more pressing matters
to attend to. By the display of a mesmerizing bauble and a
simple suggestion, the caster could cause an attacker to sud-
denly halt and depart, or to make an enemy go on a journey
for the duration of the spell. The distracted character follows
any single command, within reason. Possibilities include “go
home,” “climb a tree,” “run to the nearest town,” and so on.
A successful roll of the skill given by the spell against the
target’s willpower/mettle (or the governing attribute) indicates
that the suggestion took hold.
Fancy Riding
Skill: Divination
Arcane Knowledge: Magic
Difficulty: 16
Effect: 9 (Skill Bonus: Animal Insight (R3), +9 to riding totals)
Range: 1 meter (+0)
Speed: Instantaneous (+0)
Duration: 1 day (+25)
Casting Time: 1 round (-4)
Other Aspects:
Components (-2): Hair or fur of a beast of burden (ordinary, destroyed)
Focused (+6): On target
Incantations (-2): “Convey!.” (phrase, loud)
A target with this spell cast upon her recieves a +9 bonus
to her riding totals. For the duration of the spell, the target
has an understanding of beasts of burdens and their natures,
knowing how to handle them and keep them under control
in nearly any condition.
Fate
Skill: Alteration
Arcane Knowledge: Magic
Difficulty: 16
Effect: 9 (Luck: Great (R1), confers 1 additional Fate Point only)
Range: 25 meters (+15)
Speed: Instantaneous (+15)
Duration: 1 round (+4)
Casting Time: 1 round (-4)
Other Aspects:
Component (-2): Common die (very common)
Concentration (-1): 1 round with willpower/mettle difficulty of 8
Incantations (-1): “Hero.” (phrase)
With this spell, the mage persuasdes the Fates to smile
upon the hero (by granting the player one Fate Point that
may be used on any one action in the round following the
casting of the spell).
Those who attempt to abuse this spell should note that
Fate suffers no challenges lightly, and playing such games
can result in the demise of a character.
Find Trap
Skill: Divination
Arcane Knowledge: Magic
Difficulty: 23
Effect: 18 (search of 6D for finding traps)
Range: 1 meter (+0)
Speed: Instantaneous (+0)
Duration: 1 hour (+18)
Casting Time: 2 rounds (-5)
Other Aspects:
Area Effect (+9): Divination sphere with radius of 3.5 meters
Focused (+7): On target
Incantations (-2): “Where’d I put that trap?” (sentence)
The magic of this spell is focused upon devilish devices.
When the caster intonesthe incantation, the spell is activated,
providing the target with 6D in search that is limited in focus
to traps of any sort within 3.5 meters of the user. If the skill
roll is a success, then the spell user sees the located trap glow
green. The finder can point out the trap to others, but it is not
similarly revealed to them. For example, if the trap is invisible,
then it remains invisible after detected. Furthermore, seeing
a trap does not convey the ability to disarm it.
((( insert illo s9-3 find trap)))
(((begin sidebar — place anywhere in wizardry section)))
The Book of Malachi
This unusual book appears to possess a heavy leather
cover, with thick pages of what might be sheepskin.
Seemingly scrawled by the pen of a monk are the precise
lines of and unknown language, as well as illuminative
page. An Easy Knowledge/Intellect o r  a  scholar roll reveals
this is an uncommon book for a monk or a monastery
to produce, as it has a devilish flavor to it.
In fact, the book was created in the tenth century in a
French monastery, but not through normal means. One
of the members of the order had been found practicing
magic, but only after a demon has possessed his physi-
cal body. The order acted quickly, performing a binding
ritual that locked both the unfortunate monk’s soul,
and the demon’s energy in the prepared vessel — The
Book of Malachi
Contents: The secrets of this book can be released
simply by the use of the understand gibberish spell (or a
similar spell). Casting this spell to read the book releases
a demon (of the gamemaster’s creation).
Protections: The book requires a special spell to
read.
Language: To all who look at the book, its weird
geometries of sketches and illuminations and bizarre
letters appear to be structured and form a language.
However, no amount of skill can decipher this book as
it is not in any particular language.
Reading Period: O n ce  understand gibberish has been
cast, and the user looks upon the first page of the book,
the rest is done: The book manifests a demonic form,
and it “reads” itself. Within one minute, a fearsome
entity stands before the empty pages of the tome.
(((end sidebar)))
Find Way
Skill: Divination
Arcane Knowledge: Magic
Difficulty: 18
Effect: 14 (+3D to navigation)
Range: 1 meter (+0)
Speed: Instantaneous (+0)
Duration: 1 day (+25)
Casting Time: 1 round (-4)
Other Aspects:
Components (-3): Compass or astrolabe (common)
Focused (+7): On target
Incantations (-3): “Find me a way to go!” (sentence, loud)
The recipient of this spell garners a +3D bonus to her
navigation skill. This bonus works under all circumstances,
including at sea, in a city, or in a maze.
Insight to Weakness
Skill: Divination
Arcane Knowledge: Magic
Difficulty: 22
Effect: 36 (Skill Bonus: Weakness Detection (R12), +36 to melee combat totals)
Range: 1 meter (+0)
Speed: Instantaneous (+0)
Duration: 2 rounds (+5)
Casting Time: 1 round (-4)
Other Aspects:
Focused (+8): On target
Incantations (-1): “See.” (phrase)
This spell grants the target +36 to melee combat totals for
two rounds. The magical incantation makes clear an oppo -
nent’s weaknesse and allows them to be taken advantage
of. No additional damage is directly conferred by this spell,
although a clever character might use it to strike at a head or
heart and perform a killing blow on an unwary opponent.
Illiterate
Skill: Alteration
Arcane Knowledge: Magic
Difficulty: 21
Effect: 3 (Illiterate (R1) Disadvantage)
Range: 1 kilometer (+15)
Speed: Instantaneous (+15)
Duration: 1 month (+32)
Casting Time: 1 hour (-18)
Other Aspects:
Components (-7): pen or quill (common); sheet of parchment (uncommon)
Gestures (-3): Write incantation and then repeat the writing in reverse, repeating until the parchment is covered (complex; languages/reading/writing roll with difficulty of 11)
Focused (+7): On target
Incantations (-2): “I will not remember how to read.” (sentence)
Unreal Effect (-1): Disbelief difficulty of 13
This devious spell causes the target to forget how to read.
While to some this is not distressing, to mages and scholars
it is a nightmare. As  the ability to read has not actually been
erased, but has only been implanted in the subconscious of
the target, it is possible to disbelieve by making a willpower/
mettle roll (or the governing attribute) at  a difficulty of 13.
Nonetheless, the situation is distressing, and the gamemaster
might consider modifiers if the target had recently bumped
her head or suffered a trauma that might cause her to believe
that she had actually lost the ability to read.
Insight into the Future
Skill: Divination
Arcane Knowledge: Magic
Difficulty: 18
Effect: 18 (up to 1 hour in the future)
Range: 1 meter (+0)
Speed: Instantaneous (+0)
Duration: 1 hour (+18)
Casting Time: 2 round (-5)
Other Aspects:
Focused (+7): On target
Incantations (-2): “Reveal the future so that I may slip truly into it.” (sentence)
After casting this spell, the target gains insight into the
future through flashes of images, sounds, and smells. A
character can possibly bring these insights into focuse by
asking a question (such as, “Who’s on the other side of the
door I’m about to open?) and making an investigation rolls.
(She may do this no more than once per round.) The game-
master decides on the difficulty, which should never be less
than Moderation, even for a simple yes-or-no question or one
centering on the near future. The higher the investigation roll
is above the difficulty, the clearer the insight becomes.
Investigate
Skill: Divination
Arcane Knowledge: Magic
Difficulty: 30
Effect: 24 (Skill Bonus: Investigation (R8), +24 to investigation totals)
Range: 5 meters (+4)
Speed: Instantaneous (+4)
Duration: 1 week (+29)
Casting Time: 1 minute (-9)
Other Aspects:
Components (-2): Magnifying glass (very common)
Focused (+10): On target
Incantations (-1): “Learn.” (phrase)
When research is needed, this spell helps find informa -
tion. When cast upon a target, he gains a bonus of +24 to
investigation totals.
While this spell doesn’t assist in comprehension, it reveals
the best clues to follow up. It is also likely that a Heroic success
provides great insight into the matter being delved into.
Invoke Emotion
Skill: Alteration
Arcane Knowledge: Magic
Difficulty: 19
Effect: 15 (persuasion of 5D)
Range: 40 meters (+8)
Speed: Instantaneous (+8)
Duration: 10 minute (+14)
Casting Time: 2 rounds (-5)
Other Aspects:
Components (-1): Pin (ordinary)
Focused (+5): On target
Gestures (-1): Use pin to point at target (simple)
Incantations (-1): State simply the desired emotion (phrase)
Unreal Effect (-4): Disbelief difficulty of 13
With a successful casting, the target must make an opposed
interaction roll against the spell’s persuasion of 5D. Failure
means that she has succumbed to the emotion suggested in
the incantation. Some single word examples are angry, happy,
laughing, sad, crying, pouting, cold, shy, frightened, amazed,
inspired, smitten, and so on. If it occurs, the moody target
can attempt to disbelieve by using willpower/mettle (or the
governing attribute) at a difficulty number of 13. When the
spell ends or is disbelieved, the effect discontinues.
((( insert illo s9-4 invoke emotion)))
Leap
Skill: Alteration
Arcane Knowledge: Magic
Difficulty: 16
Effect: 15 (Skill Bonus: Frog Legs (R5), +15 to jumping/ climb/jump totals)
Range: 1 meter (+0)
Speed: Instantaneous (+0)
Duration: 1 hour (+18)
Casting Time: 1 round (-4)
Other Aspects:
Components (-2): Frog legs (very common)
Countenance (-1): Target’s legs take on a froggish appearance
Focused (+6): On target
Incantations (-1): “Bound.” (phrase)
This spell grants a temporary bonus of +15 to a character’s
jumping/climb/jump totals skill. For the duration of the spell,
the legs of the target take on the muscled appearance of those
of a frog’s legs. Although the bone structure remains the same,
a Moderate investigation roll discerns that there is something
usual about the muscles of the targeted person’s legs.
Mistaken Identity
Skill: Alteration
Arcane Knowledge: Magic, folk
Difficulty: 28
Effect:  24 (Shapechanging (R1), one specific person; Skill Bonus: In Disguise (R5), +15 to bluff/con totals related to disguise)
Range: 10 meters (+5)
Speed: Instantaneous (+5)
Duration: 1 week (+29)
Casting Time: 25 minutes (-16)
Other Aspects:
Focused (+10): On target
Incantations (-1): Repeat name of new identity (phrase)
Other Conditions (-1): Target must know person
To properly use this spell requires that the target remain
in place for 30 minutes and that she knows the identity
she is going to assume. If the spell is a success, there is not
only a physical transformation — there is also a mental
transformation.
Once magically convinced, the target takes on the manner-
isms, attitudes, and physical actions of the desired persona.
Any necessary memories are manufactured, which might
end up being a trigger to those who know the real person.
Nonetheless, until the spell wears off, as far as the target
knows, she is that person, so lie detectors and other means
of detecting fibs are fruitless.
Perfect Touch
Skill: Divination
Arcane Knowledge: Magic
Difficulty: 22
Effect: 36 (Skill Bonus: Perfect Touch (R12), +36 to sleight of hand totals)
Range: 1 meter (+0)
Speed: Instantaneous (+0)
Duration: 2 rounds (+5)
Casting Time: 1 round (-4)
Other Aspects:
Focused (+8): On target
Incantations (-1): “When.” (phrase)
A successful casting of this spell allows the target to perform
the sleight of hand skill with heroic ability, granting a tempo-
rary bonus of +36 to such totals. This not really an increase
in ability so much as it is a unique understanding of how to
increase finger deftness or when to pick a pocket.
Possess the Living Mind
Skill: Divination
Arcane Knowledge: Magic
Difficulty: 24
Effect: 21 (Possession: Partial (R1), with Restricted (R1), may only read target’s mind)
Range: 100 meters (+10)
Speed: Instantaneous (+10)
Duration: 1 day (+25)
Casting Time: 1 hour (-18)
Other Aspects:
Components (-5): Personal possession of target (uncommon); chalk (very common)
Focused (+9): Mage’s mind stays with target
Gestures (-3): Draw circles and sigils of possession with chalk (complex; artist roll with difficulty of 11)
Incantations (-2): “Open your mind to my thoughts.” (sentence)
The canny mage can use this spell to ride along with another
being for a day. The caster perceives the world through the
target’s senses and can possibly read the victim’s thoughts.
(The result points from casting this spell are used on the
“Possession Knowledge” chart to determine how much
information the mage gathers.)
When attempting to possess another, the mage must make
a check of willpower/mettle (or the governing attribute) against
the standard interaction difficulty. Exceeding the difficulty
means that the target is unaware of the hitchhiker. Meeting
the difficulty indicates that the target knows someone else is
sharing her mind, though she doesn’t know who it is. Failure
means that victim managed to kick out the caster before he
could get a foothold.
In no case does the caster have any influence on the per-
son’s actions. Additonally, the caster is only dimly aware of
what is going on around his body.
Slip
Skill: Alteration
Arcane Knowledge: Magic
Difficulty: 28
Effect: 18 (Hindrance: Slick Surface (R6), +6 to acrobatics, dodge, and running difficulties)
Range: 40 meters (+8)
Speed: Instantaneous (+8)
Duration: 1 minute (+9)
Casting Time: 1 round (-4)
Other Aspects:
Area Effect (+20): Circle with radius of 10 meters
Components (-2): Drop of oil (ordinary, destoryed)
Gestures (-1): Rub oil between fingers (simple)
Incantations (-1): “Slip.” (phrase)
Upon casting this spell, a oily surface covers the desig -
nated area. Everyone within the affected area suffers a +6
difficulty modifier to most physical actions that involve leg
and feet movement.
(((illo s9-5)))
Speak Language
Skill: Divination
Arcane Knowledge: Magic
Difficulty: 12
Effect: 18 (languages/speaking of 6D, for speaking only)
Range: 1 meter (+0)
Speed: Instantaneous (+0)
Duration: 1 minute (+9)
Casting Time: 2 rounds (-5)
Other Aspects:
Components (-2): Fashioned leather tongue (common)
Focused (+5): On target
Gestures (-1): Point (simple)
The recipient of this spell can speak in an unknown tongue
with a limited languages/speaking skil of 6D. Unless a spell
that permits understanding languages is also cast on the
same target, it is not possible to understand a reply in the
language. The gamemaster determines the difficulty for the
target to express ideas, based upon how common or alien
the language is.
Sphere of Protection
Skill: Conjuration
Arcane Knowledge: Magic
Difficulty: 19
Effect: 24 (compare to skill total of spell countering)
Range: 1 meter (+0)
Speed: Instantaneous (+0)
Duration: 1 minute (+9)
Casting Time: 1 round (-4)
Other Aspects:
Area Effect (+15): Sphere with radius of 3 meters
Components (-4): Diamond (very rare)
Gestures (-1): Drop diamond on ground (simple)
Incantations (-1): “Stop magic.” (phrase)
When the mage casts this spell and drops the diamond up to
a meter from her, a magically disruptive sphere forms around
it. All who are within the sphere are protected against spells.
The spell doesn’t prohibit ranged attacks or fighting of any
sort within the sphere. However, the skill totals of all spells
directed at occupants in the area of effect are compared to
the effect’s value plus the result point bonus of the spell. If
the defending spell’s total is higher than the intruding spell’s
skill total, then the opposing spell is completely repulsed.
As the spell is not actually focused on the diamond or
anyone else, friend or foe may enter or leave the area without
disrupting the spell.
Stretch
Skill: Alteration
Arcane Knowledge: Magic
Difficulty: 14
Effect: 3 (Elasticity (R1), +1 to contortion, dodge, and sleight of hand totals, and +1 to disguise totals that target performs on himself — for D6 Space, use acrobatics: contortion and con: disguise instead of the related listed skills)
Range: 10 meters (+5)
Speed: Instantaneous (+5)
Duration: 1 hour (+18)
Casting Time: 1 round (-4)
Other Aspects:
Components (-1): Something elastic (ordinary)
Focused (+4): On target
Gestures (-1): Stretch the component (simple)
Incantations (-1): “Stretch.” (phrase)
This spell grants the target the ability to slip through
tight spots and wiggle out of harms way, using the Elasticity
Special Ability at rank 1. See the appropriate section in the
“Character Options” chapter for additional details.
Stun
Skill: Conjuration
Arcane Knowledge: Magic
Difficulty: 21
Effect: 15 (4D physical damage, stun only, ignores nonmagical armor)
Range: 25 meters (+15)
Speed: Instantaneous (+15)
Duration: 1 second (+0)
Casting Time: 3.5 seconds (-3)
Other Aspects:
Incantations (-1): “Stun.” (phrase)
With the utterance of a simple word, a mage can stun an
opponent. The successful casting of this spell causes 4D stun
damage to the intended target. All that is required is that
mental focus be placed upon the intended victim (with a
successful Moderate willpower/mettle roll). The spell effects
cannot be protected against by nonmagical armor. However,
the damage is treated as stun damage as indicated in the
“Damage” chapter of the rulebook.
Telepathy
Skill: Alteration
Arcane Knowledge: Folk, magic
Difficulty: 16
Effect: 24 (telepathy of 4D)
Range: Self (+0)
Speed: Instantaneous (+0)
Duration: 1 hour (+18)
Casting Time: 1 round (-4)
Other Aspects:
Concentration (-2): 1 round with willpower/mettle difficulty of 8
Focused (+8): On caster
This spell grants the target 4D in the telepathy skill. It func-
tions identically to the Psionics skill as described in the D6
Adventure Rulebook chapter on “Psionics.” Because the skill
links minds, it is possible for one person to read the thoughts
of another character and determine if a lie is being told or
detect fear. When using this skill, refer to the “Empathy and
Telepathy” table and the “Lie Detecting” table.
Understand Gibberish
Skill: Divination
Arcane Knowledge: Magic
Difficulty: 19
Effect: 12 (4D languages — speaking or reading/writing in *D6 Fantasy*)
Range: 1 meter (+0)
Speed: Instantaneous (+0)
Duration: 1 day (+25)
Casting Time: 2 rounds (-5)
Other Aspects:
Components (-1): Wax (ordinary)
Focused (+7): On target
Gestures (-1): Point (simple)
Through the aid of magic, it is possible for a targeted
character to understand any language or code. Providing the
spell is successful, the selected character gains 4D languages
(speaking or reading/writing in D6 Fantasy ) in the specific
language being heard or read at the moment of casting. This
includes a normally unknown or undecipherable language,
although the task is much more difficult. Understand gibberish
also works with codes.
The gamemaster determines the difficulty, based upon
how common or unusual it is.
Voices
Skill: Conjuration
Arcane Knowledge: Magic
Difficulty: 18
Effect: 24 (Skill Bonus: Throw Voice (R8), +24 to bluff/con totals)
Range: 60 meters (+9)
Speed: Instantaneous (+9)
Duration: 1 minute (+9)
Casting Time: 1 round (-4)
Other Aspects:
Area Effect (+10): Sphere with radius of 2 meters
Components (-3): Leather cord (common)
Gestures (-2): Pull on cord (fairly simple)
Incantations (-1): Whisper distracting words (phrase)
Unreal Effect (-6): Disbelief difficulty of 13
By uttering a few words, a guard or group of guards can
be led astray. If successfully cast, this spell gives the magic
user a +24 bonus to the bluff/con total needed for this spell.
The results can affect anyone in a specified two-meter radius
up to 60 meters away.
An opposed interaction roll is made against the target or
targets. Anyone failing this roll heads toward the direction
the caster made the voices appear to come from. For the
duration of the spell, the incantation words are repeated
over and over.

Elemental
----------

(((begin sidebar)))
Many of the spells in this section are template spells —
they’re the ones with “template” after the name. A template
spell provides an easy shorthand way to write up several
different but very similar spells. Elemental spells benefit in
particular from templates, because many spells can be used
with any of the four elements — air, earth, fire and water.
Each template spell must be learned and cast as a separate
spell, but other than the type of element used for the spell,
all four spells are identical.
(((end sidebar)))
Acidic Attack
Skill: Alteration
Arcane Knowledge: Water
Difficulty: 20
Effect:  23 (5D physical damage, ignores nonmagical armor)
Range: 25 meters (+7)
Speed: Instantaneous (+7)
Duration: 5 rounds (+7)
Casting Time: 1 round (-4)
Other Aspects:
Component (-4): Small vile of acid (uncommon)
Focused (+6): On target
Gestures (-1): Shaking the vile at the target (simple)
Incantations (-1): “Burn!.” (phrase)
When a mage casts acidic attack, the spell lasts for 5 rounds.
Each round, damage continues, but is reduced by 1D. This
represents the acid’s potency gradually decreasing.  Nonmagi-
cal armor does not offer a defense against this spell, as the
mystical corrosive promptly burns through metal, leather,
clothing, and so on.
As the attack is magical, there is no way to extinguish the
acid except to dispel it.
Burrow
Skill: Apportation
Arcane Knowledge: Earth
Difficulty: 18
Effect: 18 (moves up to 150 kilograms)
Range: 1 meter (+0)
Speed: Instantaneous (+0)
Duration: 1 hour (+18)
Casting Time: 2.5 seconds (-2)
Other Aspects:
Components (-3): A mole skull (common)
Focused (+7): On caster
Gestures (-2): Digging motions with hands (fairly simple)
Incantations (-1): “Dig.” (phrase)
Variable Movement (+1): Movement of 5 meters per round
The burrow spell allows the caster to move through all types
of soil at a rapid pace. When the spell is completed, the caster
sinks into the earth in a fountain of dirt and sand. As he
travels through the earth, the soil in front of him is pushed
behind, collapsing the tunnel he creates. The mage using the
spell will have a rudimentary idea of which way he is going,
but he may need to poke his head back above the surface from
time to time to make sure he is not going off track.
The spell does not allow the caster to move through stone
or any material harder than clay. He usually travels one meter
under the surface, but if he encounters stone that he cannot
penetrate, he may go up or down in the strata to avoid it.
There is a small pocket of air that travels with the user,
allowing him to breathe as he wriggles through the soil.
Several trips to the surface during the duration are necessary
to refresh this air pocket.
(((illo s2-1)))
Cone of Wind
Skill: Conjuration
Arcane Knowledge: Air
Difficulty: 11
Effect: 18 (brawling/fighting of 6D)
Range: 1 meter (+0)
Speed: Instantaneous (+0)
Duration: 1 second (0)
Casting Time: 2.5 seconds (-2)
Other Aspects:
Area (+10): Cone 8 meters long and 4 meters at its wide end
Gestures (-1): Both hands make a pushing motion in the direction of the wind (simple)
Incantations (-3): “Mighty wind, drive my enemies before me!” (sentence, loud)
This spell is a favorite of mages who want to knock down
opponents without doing any permanent injury. When the
spell is cast a cone of powerful wind blasts from the caster’s
hands out to a distance of eight meters. The cone is about
30 centimeters wide at the casters hands and spreads out to
four meters in diameter at its far end.
The caster rolls the brawling/fighting score that the spell
generates once; this total is used as a knockdown attempt
against the combat difficulty for each target within one meter
of the caster. (Those over one meter away get a +1 bonus to
their defense totals per full meter distant.)  Anyone who fails
to withstand the blast fall to the ground and must spend an
action in the next round getting up.
This attack affects opponents with a Physique/Strength
die code of no more than the spell’s skill total divided by 3
(ignore any remainder).
This spell does not require a separate targeting roll.
Control Elemental (Template)
Skill: Conjuration
Arcane Knowledge:  Entity, any one element: air, earth, fire, or water
Difficulty: 18
Effect: 18 (command: elemental of 6D)
Range: 2.5 meters (+3)
Speed: Instantaneous (+3)
Duration: 1 hour (+18)
Casting Time: 1 round (-4)
Other Aspects:
Components (-5): Small figurine of elemental type, made of precious metals and jewels (very rare)
Focused (+7): On caster
Gestures (-2): Make a circle with both arms (fairly simple)
Incantations (-2): “(Type of elemental), bow to my will!” (sentence, loud)
This spell bends the mind and will of an elemental, forcing
it to do the caster’s bidding. An elemental under the effects
of this spell becomes a slave to the caster, doing anything
he compels it to.
When the spell is cast, the caster generates a command:
elemental skill total and compares it to the willpower/mettle
total generated by the elemental. If the caster’s total is higher,
the elemental is his to command for the duration of the spell.
The caster will be aware that this spell is about to end just
before the duration expires, giving him time to recast the
spell if he wishes.
If the elemental makes a higher total than the caster of the
spell, the elemental may have a bad reaction to the caster, or
it may flee the area, depending on its type, relative power,
and temperament. Fire and water elemental will be more
likely to attack, being more mercurial and hostile, while air
and earth elementals will be more prone to flight.
Control Local Weather
Skill: Alteration
Arcane Knowledge: Air, inanimate forces, water
Difficulty: 19
Effect: 0 (changes based on result points)
Range: Self (+0)
Speed: Instantaneous (+0)
Duration: 1 hour (+18)
Casting Time: 1 hour (-18)
Other Aspects:
Area Effect (+55): Sphere with radius of 11 meters
Components (-6): A rainmaker, a statuette or tube made of wood and designed to sound like rain when shaken (common, destroyed)
Concentration (-5): 10 minutes with willpower/mettle difficulty of 11
Gestures (-2): Broad sweeping hand motions toward the sky (fairly simple)
Incantations (-4): “Powers of nature, make the weather my slave.” (litany; willpower/mettle diffiuclty of 15)
This spell gives the caster the ability to control the weather
to a limited extent. To cast the spell, the mage concentrates
for 10 minutes on what type of weather he wants, and then
chants the incantation continuously for the remainder of
an hour.
The spell manipulates  the temperature, pressure, and
humidty within 11 meters of the caster. How successful
he is in making the change depends on the result points of
the spell, as detailed below. When the duration expires, the
weather gradually returns to its prespell conditions.
The gamemaster decides on the local weather conditions
using the charts herein. Each level of change from the cur -
rent conditions requires one result point. Thus, if the day is
fair with warm temperatures and a light breeze, to make it
cold and foggy with a strong wind requires four result points.
(A skill total equalling the difficulty may make one level of
change in aspect of the weather.)
The caster can also change the radius of the effect at a cost
of three result points for each additional meter.
As this is a magical change, the weather may not behave
as it would under normal circumstances.
It must always be remembered that changing the weather
in one place may also change it in some way somewhere
else. This can prompt revenge attacks from other mages
or angry residents, so users of this spell must exercise the
utmost care.
(((sidebar)))
Control Local Weather Effects
Round all fractions up. Modifiers are cumulative.
Percipitation Levels
• None (fair weather)
• Fog (all sight-based actions have a difficulty modifier
equal to the result points, with a minimum of +1)
• Rain (or snow\*)
• Freezing rain\* (all physical actions have a difficulty
modifier equal to one-quarter of the result points,
with a minimum of +1)
• Sleet\* (all physical actions have a difficulty modi -
fier equal to one-half of the result points, with a
minimum of +1)
• Small hail\*\* (damage per round equals one-quarter of
the result points, with a minimum of 1 point)
• Large hail\*\* (damage per round equals one-half of the
result points, with a minimum of 1 point)
\* Temperature must also be freezing.
\*\*Hail can be in combination with rain/snow or no percipitation, at the caster’s choice.
Temperature Levels
• Freezing (damage per round equals the result points,
with a minimum of 1 point)
• Cold
• Warm
• Hot (all physical actions have a difficulty modifier
equal to one-quarter of the result points, with a
minimum of +1)
• Very hot (damage per round equals one-half of the
result points, with a minimum of 1 point)
Wind Levels
• None
• Light breeze
• Moderate winds
• Strong winds (all physical actions have a difficulty
modifier equal to one-quarter of the result points,
with a minimum of +1)
• Gale (all physical actions have a difficulty modifier
equal to one-half of the result points, with a mini-
mum of +1)
• Storm (all physical actions have a difficulty modifier
equal to the result points, with a minimum of +1)
• Hurricane/tornado (all physical actions have a diffi-
culty modifier equal to 1.25 times the result points,
with a minimum of +1; the gamemaster may also
decide that small items are whipped about, caus -
ing injury)
(((sidebar)))
Create Element (Template)
Skill: Conjuration
Arcane Knowledge:  any one element: air, earth, fire, or water
Difficulty: 11
Effect: 10 (100 liters or 0.1 cubic meters)
Range: 3.5 meters (+3)
Speed: Instantaneous (+3)
Duration: 10 minutes (+14)
Casting Time: 1 round (-4)
Other Aspects:
Gestures (-2): Cup hands, whisper into them, then mime throwing toward target spot (fairly simple)
Incantations (-3): “Elemental Powers, create (name of element)!” (sentence, loud)
This is one of the first spells learned by many elemental
mages. By casting the spell, the mage conjures a small amount
of the element in its raw form. Water appears as a puddle if
there is no container to hold it; fire burns away merrily without
fuel; air disperses into the space around it; and earth appears
in a pile on the ground. None of these conjured elements can
be used as a weapon by creating them on or inside a person;
the effect of the spell makes the element only in a clear area
unoccupied by another person or object.
As this is magically crafted material, it doesn’t have all the
physical characteristics as natural elements. For example,
created water does not stay around long enough to be fully
digested by the body, but it can be used for cleansing. The
fire only can be used to shed illumination. Air might aid in
respiration. Earth could be used to design a small enclosure.
The specific game benefits of these are based on the result
points and determined by the gamemaster.
Create Elemental (Template)
Skill: Conjuration
Arcane Knowledge:  any one element: air, earth, fire, or water
Difficulty: 34
Effect: 68 (15 attribute dice, arranged as the caster likes; Body Points/Wounds and movement based on result points)
Range: 1 meter (+0)
Speed: Instantaneous (+0)
Duration: 1 hour (+18)
Casting Time: 10 minutes (-14)
Other Aspects:
Components (-10): 1 carat gemstone, see below for type (very rare, destroyed)
Concentration (-5): 10 minutes with willpower/mettle difficulty of 11
Focused (+17): On created elemental
The caster can cause any combination of these changes,
as long as the total point cost does not exceed 2 times the
result points of the spell casting.
• Expand the area affected by 1 meter: 5 points
• Change the temperature: Look up the desired change
in degrees Celsius under the Measures column of the “Spell
Measures” table; the equivalent value is the number of points
this changes costs
• Change the pressure by 0.01 bars: 1 point
• Change humidity by
With a minimal success, the caster may only raise or lower
the temperature within 2 degrees Celsius. A slight breeze
could be created, and perhaps some wispy, clouds. Average
success allows the caster to raise or lower the temperature
by 5 degrees, conjure or dispel a moderate amount of cloud
cover, and a stiff breeze of less than 10 kph could also be cre-
ated or canceled. Good success on the casting roll will allow
the mage to cause or cancel light rain or snow, change the
temperature by up to 10 degrees, and change the wind speed
by up to 20 kph. Truly powerful weather conditions can be
created or stopped with a superior success. the temperature
can be raised or lowered by 20 degrees, and wind speed can
be modified by up to 40 kph. A thunderstorm or snowstorm
can be conjured or canceled. Spectacular success allows the
temperature to be raised or lowered by 30 degrees, wind
changes of up to 80 kph, and the ability to create or cancel
powerful storms of rain or snow.
Gestures (-2): Circular hand motions with gemstone com- ponent (fairly simple)
Incantations (-4): Long speech explaining exact details of the type of elemental desired (litany; persuasion roll with difficulty of 15)
In many elemental mage circles, the ability to cast this
spell successfully is what differentiates the true masters of
the art from the pretenders. Performing the spell successfully
creates a powerful servant composed of the elemental type
specified by the spell. The caster dictates the attributes of the
final form that the elemental takes as part of the spell. Some
samples are given below of the different type of elementals
that can be created.
The type of gemstone needed for the spell varies with what
type of elemental the caster is creating: Air needs a diamond,
earth requires an emerald, fire specifies a ruby, and water
uses a blue sapphire.
The elemental created is not necessarily under the control
of the caster. A smart mage will be prepared to cast the con-
trol elemental spell immediately. Alternately, some casters
who have an intimate knowledge of elementals may try to
use gifts or promises of future favors to bribe the elemental
into serving them.
The 15 attribute dice may be allocated as the caster sees
fit, and with the gamemaster’s permission, she may use some
of the dice to buy Special Abilities to reflect the natural abili-
ties of the elemental. The elemental will have a number of
Body Points equal to 10 plus the points by which the spell
beat the difficulty; Wound levels equal to the points above
the difficulty, divided by two, rounded up, minimum of one
Wound level. Movement equals the result points in meters
per round, with a minimum of one meter per round.
Sample Elementals
Here are some sample elementals that could be
created with this spell. Special Abilities are given for
point cost reference. The attribute names are from D6
Adventure; gamemasters and players using other genres
should convert the names.
Air Elemental: Reflexes 2D, Coordination 2D,
Physique 2D, Knowledge 1D, Perception 1D, Charisma
1D. Move: 1+. Strength Damage: 1D. Body Points: 10+/
Wound levels: 1+. Natural Abilities: Flight (R1, 6 points),
flying rate equals 2 times Move.
Earth Elemental: Reflexes 2D, Coordination 1D,
Physique 6D, Knowledge 1D, Perception 1D, Charisma
1D. Move: 1+.  Strength Damage: 3D. Body Points: 10+/
Wound levels: 1+. Natural Abilities: Natural Armor (R1,
3 points) +1D to damage resistance totals.
Fire Elemental: Reflexes 4D, Coordination 3D,
Physique 3D, Knowledge 1D, Perception 1D, Charisma
1D. Move: 1+.  Strength Damage: 2D. Body Points: 10+/
Wound levels: 1+ . Natural Abilities:  Natural Ranged
Weapon: Flame (R1, 3 points), 3D damage.
Water Elemental: Reflexes 3D, Coordination 3D,
Physique 4D, Knowledge 1D, Perception 1D, Charisma
1D. Move: 1+.  Strength Damage: 2D. Body Points: 10+/
Wound levels: 1+. Natural Abilities: Natural Armor (R1,
3 points) +1D to damage resistance totals.
Desiccate
Skill: Alteration
Arcane Knowledge: Water
Difficulty: 16
Effect: 18 (3D physical damage, ignores all armor)
Range: 5 meters (+5)
Speed: Instantaneous (+5)
Duration: 1 minute (+9)
Casting Time: 2.5 seconds (-2)
Other Aspects:
Component (-4): Small strip of dried rawhide (very common, destroyed)
Focused (+5): Target of the spell
Gestures (-1): Point at target (simple)
Incantations (-2): “Drought shall be your death!” (sentence)
Other Conditions (-1): Ineffective against those without fluid in their bodies
This is a particularly nasty spell, used by sorcerers with
little regard for mercy. The spell is targeted with a marksman-
ship/firearms or apportation roll. If the attack is successful,
the target takes 3D of damage each round for the next 12
rounds. This damage is caused by the rapid desiccation, or
removal of fluid, from all of the target’s soft tissues. This is
an extremely painful and unpleasant process to say the least,
and if the spell does enough damage to kill the target, all that
is left is a dried, mummy-like husk.
Armor is ineffective against this damage, since the dam -
age comes from inside the target’s body. Any creature that
does not have fluid inside of it, like a golem or other creature
made of stone, is unaffected.
Drown
Skill: Conjuration
Arcane Knowledge: Water
Difficulty: 21
Effect: 36 (6D physical damage, ignores all armor)
Range: 2.5 meters (+2)
Speed: Instantaneous (+2)
Duration: 2 rounds (+5)
Casting Time: 3.5 seconds (-3)
Other Aspects:
Components (-2): A mouthful of water (ordinary, destroyed)
Focused (+5): On target
Gestures (-2): Spit mouthful of water at target (fairly simple)
Incantations (-2): “A sailor’s death shall take you!” (sentence)
To cast this spell, the mage fills his mouth with water,
spits it at the target, and speaks the incantation. The spell
is aimed with a throwing (not apportation) roll. If it hits suc-
cessfully, the target’s lungs fill with water and she begins to
drown, taking 6D of damage for the next two rounds. Armor
does not help absorb this damage, but the target can make
a stamina roll with a difficulty equal to the caster’s spell skill
total to expel the water from his lungs after the first round.
If successful, he takes no damage from the second round of
the spell effect.
Earth Muse
Skill: Divination
Arcane Knowledge: earth, time
Difficulty: 19
Effect: 34 (2.5 months in the past)
Range: 1 meter (+0)
Speed: Instantaneous (+0)
Duration: 5 minutes (+13)
Casting Time: 40 minutes (-17)
Other Aspects:
Area Effect (+21): Divination sphere with radius of 25 meters
Components (-5): A miniature sundial (uncommon); dirt or stone (ordinary)
Concentration (-2): 1 round with a willpower/mettle difficulty of 8
Gestures (-2): As the incantation is spoken, place hands on the stone or ground in the center of the area of effect; slowly, draw in the arms and place the palms on closed eyes. After pausing for several seconds, throw hands out wide. (fairly simple)
Incantations (-4): Utter the following after meditation: “Oh mighty spirits who have seen all, heed my plea and answer my call. The time grows nigh to share your thoughts; come to me now and show what time has wrought!” (litany; persuasion roll with difficulty of 15)
Although there are many who may choose to think oth -
erwise, there are beings that dwell just beyond the realm of
human perception. These spiritual elemental forces of nature
often live far longer than the mere mortals who sometimes
rudely intrude upon their realm. Theirs is the gift of knowl-
edge, for these enigmatic souls have experienced much dur-
ing their existence. The power of the earth muse spell allows
the mage to communicate with elemental forces that dwell
within the ground, untamed stone or stone structures. Such
creatures are able to speak of things that have occurred in
the spell’s area of effect. Persistent characters who repeat -
edly question the earthen sages about items or events that
are out of their range of caring (events that are more than
2.5 months old) or beyond the area of effect cause the spell
to abruptly end. The caster has worn out her welcome with
the beings that she’s trying to gather information from. If
this should happen, no spirits will answer the caster’s call
for 24 hours should she attempts to recast earth muse  in
the same area. A Critical Failure along with a failed skill roll
when attempting to cast earth muse temporally blights the
intended area of effect and no earth muse spells will function
there for 24 hours.
Earthquake
Skill: Alteration
Arcane Knowledge: Earth
Difficulty: 32
Effect: 15 (5D physical damage)
Range: 1 kilometer (+15)
Speed: 10 meters per second (+5)
Duration: 1 minute (+9)
Casting Time: 1 hour (-18)
Other Aspects:
Area Effect (+30): Circle with radius of 15 meters
Components (-10): A diamond of at least 1 carat (very rare, destroyed)
Concentration (-5): 10 minutes with willpower/mettle difficulty of 11
Gestures (-3): A series of foot and hand gestures (complex; acrobatics roll with difficulty of 11)
Incantations (-4): Complex litany of elemental names and formulas (litany; languages/speaking roll with difficulty of 15)
Other Alterants (+30): +10D additional damage done to stationary targets
Other Conditions (-1): Cannot affect anything flying
Casting this spell causes the ground within the area of
effect to be shaken by violent tremors. Anything or anyone
touching the ground will take 5D of damage for each full
round they spend inside the area of the quake. Stationary
targets — such as trees and buildings — take an additional
10D of damage per round. Any movement through the area
of the quake decreases by a number of meters per round equal
to the result points (minimum adjustment of zero), as the
shaking throws about objects and heaves the ground.
Because the area of the spell is so large, no targeting roll
is necessary. The caster may simply center the quake on any
point within the range.
After the spell is cast, it takes the quake some time to begin.
Use the “Spell Measures” chart in the rulebook to find the
value of the range from the caster to the center of the quake,
subtract the speed value of 5, and look up this number on the
chart. Convert the related measure to minutes or seconds to
see how long it takes the quake to begin.
(((illo s2-3)))
Elemental Body (Template)
Skill: Conjuration
Arcane Knowledge:  any one element: air, earth, fire, or water
Difficulty: 15
Effect: 15 (+2D physical damage; Armor Value of 2D)
Range: Touch (+0)
Speed: Instantaneous (+0)
Duration: 1 minute (+9)
Casting Time: 1.5 seconds (-1)
Other Aspects:
Focused (+4): On target
Gestures (-1): Touch subject (simple)
Incantations (-2): “(Name of element), protect me and harm my foe!” (sentence)
Other Alterant (+6): Effect doubled against one opposite element (specified at time of casting)
When cast, this spell covers the body of the target (and
anything she wears or holds) in a sheath of the element.
This sheath provides armor and adds damage to any attacks
made with appendages or hand-held weapons. The armor
and damage effects are doubled if they are used against
the opposite element. For example, a mage sheathed in fire
would do double damage against water-based creatures, and
his armor from the spell would protect him double from
water-based attacks.
(((illo s2-2)))
Elemental Burst (Template)
Skill: Conjuration
Arcane Knowledge:  any one element: air, earth, fire, or water
Difficulty: 17
Effect: 12 (4D physical damage)
Range: 40 meters (+8)
Speed: Instantaneous (+8)
Duration: 1 second (0)
Casting Time: 1 round (-4)
Other Aspects:
Area Effect (+15): Sphere with radius of 3 meters
Components (-1): A tiny amount of the element used in the burst (ordinary)
Gestures (-2): Move both hands inward, and then throw them out like an explosion (fairly simple)
Incantations (-2): “(Name of element), destroy my enemies with your power!” (sentence)
A favorite of many combat mages, this spell conjures a
powerful burst of the element, damaging all the targets within
its area. The spell does not discern between friend and foe,
so the caster must use care in aiming the blast.
The form of the shot depends on the element used: Air is
a concussive inward blast; earth, a hail of rocks; fire, a huge
burst of flame; and water, a powerful drowning wave.
The caster generates a throwing or apportation total against
the combat difficulty of the main target. The total receives a
+3, because the spell covers a large area, making it easier to
hit the target. Those more than a meter away from the center
with defense totals greater than the targeting roll (without
the bonus) dodge out of the way. For everyone else, reduce the
damgae done by 1 for each meter away from the center.
Elemental Edge (Template)
Skill: Conjuration
Arcane Knowledge:  any one element: air, earth, fire, or water
Difficulty: 12
Effect: 14 (+3D physical damage)
Range: 1 meter (+0)
Speed: Instantaneous (+0)
Duration: 1 minute (+9)
Casting Time: 3.5 seconds (-3)
Other Aspects:
Focused (+4): On a weapon
This simple spell covers the dangerous part of a weapon
with a sheath of energy that causes extra damage. The type
of energy varies depending on the elemental type of the
spell: Air covers the weapon in electricity, earth is acid, the
fire sheath is flames, and water is brutally cold ice. For the
duration of the spell, the weapon inflicts an additional 3D of
damage every time it successfully strikes a target.
Elemental Scrying
Skill: Divination
Arcane Knowledge: Time, earth, air, fire, water
Difficulty: 13
Effect: 32 (up to 1 month into the future)
Range: 1 meter (+0)
Speed: Instantaneous (+0)
Duration: 5 minutes (+13)
Casting Time: 1 minute (-9)
Other Aspects:
Components (-7): A small piece of the target of the spell, such as nail clippings, a few hairs, or a drop of blood (common); small amount of each of the four elements (very common, destroyed)
Gestures (-2): Wave hands over components (fairly simple)
Incantations (-2): “Elements of the universe, show me this person’s future.”(sentence)
According to some philosophies, the entire universe is
composed of the four elements. By drawing upon the con -
nection of these elements to all things, the caster can pull
back the veil of time and peer into the future. Because the
future is not set, the visions that the caster sees of the future
may or may not come true, and divination is far from an exact
science. The act of seeing what will happen in the target’s
future can often change the future as well, so anything seen
with this spell should be taken with a grain of salt in the best
of circumstances.
To cast the spell, the mage spends one minute murmuring
the incnatation over the elements and the bit of the target.
At the end of that time, the caster receives a burst of insight,
highlighting about five minutes’ worth of events for the next
month of the target’s life. The result points of the casting roll
determine how much information the caster can get about
the target’s future.
Zero points reveals small details and perhaps a few flashes of
important facts. One to four points allows the most important
or dangerous event to be revealed, without a great amount of
detail. Five to eight points gives more information about the
key event, and a much closer timeframe, along with minor
details. Nine to 12 points allows even more details and vague
information about the remainder of the day surrounding the
key as well. More than 12 points reveals up to five minutes
of the most important event like a movie, plus gives a decent
recounting of the remainder of the month, even if that would
make duration longer than five minutes.
Example: Morgan the mage wants to see into her com -
panion Bator’s future. She successfully casts the spell. If
she achieved a minimal success, she would know that Bator
will be in grave danger during the next month. On a solid
success, she would know that the fighter was going to be
ambushed some time in the afternoon of the following day.
Good success would tell Morgan that Bator was going to be
ambushed by a large group; sometime in the early afternoon.
Superior success would tell the mage that the rest of Bator’s
month will be uneventful, and that the ambush was going
to be from a group of 15 goblins at 2:00 p.m. Finally, if the
mage manages to achieve Spectacular success, she will see the
ambush as if it were happening in front of her, with a good
amount of exacting detail.
Note that in the example above the mage was never told
exactly where the ambush would happen, or how to avoid it.
Even if Bator stays right where he is for a month, the ambush
could still happen, but the details would change slightly from
the vision seen by the scrying mage. The gamemaster should
never let a good roll on a divination spell disrupt the game.
Flame Jet
Skill: Conjuration
Arcane Knowledge: Fire
Difficulty: 17
Effect: 12 (4D physical damage)
Range: 3 meters (+3)
Speed: Instantaneous (+3)
Duration: 1 minute (+9)
Casting Time: 2.5 seconds (-2)
Other Aspects:
Components (-2): A small open flame (ordinary, destroyed)
Gestures (-1): Point finger (simple)
Focused (+4): On caster’s finger
Incantations (-1): “Burn!” (phrase)
Variable Duration (+8): On/off switch
This spell causes a roaring line of fire to erupt from the
caster’s fingertip. The jet is only a few centimeters across,
but it extends out to about three meters from the caster.
The caster can freely turn the effect on and off during the
one minute duration, to avoid accidentally burning things
he does not want to. Marksmanship/firearms or apportation is
used to aim the jet if it is being used as an attack. The caster
can make one attack with it per round.
Lightning Bolt
Skill: Conjuration
Arcane Knowledge: Inanimate Forces
Difficulty: 15
Effect: 18 (6D physical damage)
Range: 100 meters (+10)
Speed: Instantaneous (+10)
Duration: 1 second (0)
Casting Time: 2.5 seconds (-2)
Other Aspects:
Components (-4): A small steel or iron rod (very common); a piece of wool (very common)
Gestures (-2): Rub the wool on the steel rod, and then mimic flinging a bolt (fairly simple)
Incantation (-3): “Power of lightning, smite my foe!” (sentence, loud)
Other Alterant (+3): Gain a bonus against targets wearing metal
Other Conditions (-1): Targeting difficulty increased when used near large amounts of metal
This spell generates a powerful stroke of lightning. The
caster must aim the bolt using throwing or apportation. If
the target of spell is wearing large amounts of metal, (a suit
of chain or plate armor, for example), she is much easier to
hit, giving a modifier of +3 to the targeting total. If a large
piece of metal is within a meter of the caster or the target,
a modifier of +3 should be added to the difficulty to hit the
target, because the metal will tend to pull the lightning away
from its intended path.
(((illo s2-4)))
Miasma
Skill: Conjuration
Arcane Knowledge: Air, darkness
Difficulty: 54
Effect: 66 (5D inhaling damage, ignores all armor; Hindrance: Blindness (R12), +4 to difficulties of all sight-dependent actions)
Range: 40 meters (+8)
Speed: Instantaneous (+8)
Duration: 3 rounds (+6)
Casting Time: 2 rounds (-5)
Other Aspects:
Area Effect (+15): Sphere with radius of 3 meters
Focused (+14): On targets
Components (-3): Rotten egg (common)
Gestures (-1): Point (simple)
A thick, black pall appears at the targeted location. Each
round that a character is within the dense cloud, she suffers
5D damage. The miasma also obscures sight, so all attacks
are done blind. All damage comes from inhaling.
((( insert illo s-15 miasma)))
Shape Element (Template)
Skill: Apportation
Arcane Knowledge:  any one element: air, earth, fire, or water
Difficulty: 11
Effect: 10 (100 liters or 0.1 cubic meters or 3D+1 damage to an elemental)
Range: 2.5 meters (+2)
Speed: Instantaneous (+2)
